Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Acetic Acid.
Glacial Acetic Acid. (CH3COOH.)
Adapted to pale lean persons with lax, flabby muscles; face pale,  
waxy (Fer.). Haemorrhage; from every mucous outlet, nose, throat, 
lungs, stomach, bowels, uterus (Fer., Mill.); metrorrhagia; 
vicarious; traumatic epistaxis (Arn.). Marasmus and other wasting 
diseases of children (Abrot., Iod., Sanic., Tub.). Great prostration;  
after injuries (Sulph. ac.); after surgical shock; after anaesthetics.  
Thirst; intense, burning, insatiable even for large quantities in 
dropsy, diabetes, chronic diarrhoea; but no thirst in fever. Sour 
belching and vomiting of pregnancy, burning water-brash and 
profuse salivation, day and night (Lac. ac., salivation < at night, 
Mer. s.). Diarrhoea; copious, exhausting, great thirst; in dropsy, 
typhus, phthisis; with night sweats. True croup, hissing respiration, 
cough with inhalation (Spong.); last stages. Inhalation of vapor of 
cider vinegar has been successfully used in croup and malignant 
diphtheria. Cannot sleep lying on the back (sleeps better on back, 
Ars.); sensation of sinking in abdomen causing dyspnoea; rests  
better lying on belly (Am. c.). Hectic fever, skin dry and hot; red 
spot on left cheek and drenching night sweats.
Relationship. It antidotes anaesthetic vapors (Amyl.); fumes of 
charcoal and gas; Opium and Stramonium. Cider vinegar 
antidotes Carbolic acid. Follows well; after Cinchona, in 
haemorrhage; after Digitalis, in dropsy. It aggravates; the 
symptoms of Arn., Bell., Lach., Mer., especially the headache from 
Belladonna.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Aconitum Napellus.
Monkshood (Ranunculacea.)
It is generally indicated in acute or recent cases occurring in young 
persons, especially girls, of a full, plethoric habit who lead a 
sedentary life; persons easily affected by atmospheric changes; 
dark hair and eyes, rigid muscular fibre. Complaints caused by 
exposure to dry cold air, dry north or west winds, or exposure to 
draughts of cold air while in a perspiration; bad effects of checked 
perspiration. Great fear and anxiety of mind, with great nervous 
excitability; afraid to go out, to go into a crowd where there is any 
excitement or many people; to cross the street. The countenance is 
expressive of fear; the life is rendered miserable by fear; is sure 
his disease will prove fatal; predicts the day he will die; fear of 
death during pregnancy. Restless, anxious, does everything in great 
haste; must change position often; everything startles him. Pains; 
are intolerable, they drive him crazy; he becomes very restless; at 
night. Hahnemann says: "Whenever Aconite is chosen 
homeopathically, you must, above all, observe the moral 
symptoms, and be careful that it closely resembles them; the 
anguish of mind and body; the restlessness; the disquiet not to be 
allayed.". This mental anxiety, worry, fear accompanies the most 
trivial ailment. Music is unbearable, makes her sad (Sab., during 
menses, Nat. c.). On rising from a recumbent position the red face 
becomes deathly pale, or he becomes faint or giddy and falls, and 
fears to rise again; often accompanied by vanishing of sight and 
unconsciousness. Amenorrhoea in plethoric young girls; after 
fright, to prevent suppression of menses. For the congestive stage 
of inflammation before localization takes place. Fever; skin dry 
and hot; face red, or pale and red alternately; burning thirst for 
large quantities of cold water; intense nervous restlessness, 
tossing about in agony; becomes intolerable towards evening and 
on going to sleep. Convulsions; of teething children; heat, jerks 
and twitches of single muscles; child gnaws its fist, frets and 
screams; skink hot and dry; high fever. Cough, croup; dry, hoarse, 
suffocating, loud, rough, croaking; hard, ringing, whistling; on 
expiration (Caust. - on inhalation, Spong.); from dry, cold winds 
or drafts of air. Aconite should never be given simply to control 
the fever, never alternated with other drugs for that purpose. If it be 
a case requiring Aconite no other drug is needed; Aconite will cure 
the case. Unless indicated by the exciting cause, is nearly always 
injurious in first stages of typhoid fever.
Aggravation. Evening and night, pains are insupportable; in a 
warm room; when rising from bed; lying on affected side (Hep., 
Nux m.).
Amelioration. In the open air (Alum., Mag. c., Puls., Sab.).
Relationship. Complementary: to Coffea in fever, sleeplessness, 
intolerance of pain; to Arnica in traumatism; to Sulphur in all 
cases. Rarely indicated in fevers which bring out eruptions. 
Aconite is the acute of Sulphur, and both precedes and follows it in 
acute inflammatory conditions.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Actaea Racemosa.
Black Cohosh (Ranunculaceae.)
Puerperal mania; thinks she is going crazy (compare, Syph.); tries 
to injure herself. Mania following disappearance of neuralgia. 
Sensation as if a heavy, black cloud had settled all over her and 
enveloped her head so that all is darkness and confusion. Illusion 
of a mouse running under her chair (Lac. c., Aeth.). Ciliary 
neuralgia; aching or sharp, darting, shooting pains in globes, 
extending to temples, vertex, occiput, orbit, < going up stairs, > 
lying down. Heart troubles from reflex symptoms of uterus or 
ovaries. Heart's action ceases suddenly; impending suffocation; 
palpitation from least motion (Dig.). Menses: irregular; exhausting 
(Alum., Coc.); delayed or suppressed by mental emotion, from 
cold, from fever; with chorea, hysteria or mania; increase of mental 
symptoms during. Spasms: hysterical or epileptic; reflex from 
uterine disease; worse during menses; chorea < left side. Severe 
left-sided infra-mammary pains (Ust.). Sharp, lancinating, electric-
like pains in various parts, sympathetic with ovarian or uterine 
irritation; in uterine region, dart from side to side. Pregnancy: 
nausea; sleeplessness; false labor-like pains; sharp pains across 
abdomen; abortion at third month (Sab.). During labor: "shivers" 
in first stage; convulsions, from nervous excitement; rigid os; pains 
severe, spasmodic, tedious, < by least noise. After-pains, worse in 
the groins. When given during last month of pregnancy, shortens 
labor, if symptoms correspond (Caul., Puls.). Excessive muscular  
soreness, after dancing, skating, or other violent muscular exertion. 
Rheumatic pains in muscles of neck and back; feel stiff, lame, 
contracted; spine sensitive, from using arms in sewing, type 
writing, piano playing (Agar., Ran. b.). Rheumatism affecting the 
bellies of the muscles; pains stitching, cramping. Rheumatic 
dysmenorrhoea.
Relationship. Similar: to, Caul., and Puls. in uterine and rheumatic 
affections; to, Agar., Lil., Sep.
Aggravation. During menstruation; the more profuse the flow the 
greater the suffering.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Aesculus Hippocastanum.
Horse Chestnut (Sapindaccae.)
For persons with haemorrhoidal tendencies, and who suffer with 
gastric, bilious or catarrhal troubles. Fullness in various parts, as 
from undue amount of blood; heart, lungs, stomach, brain, pelvis, 
skin. Venous congestion, especially portal and haemorrhoidal. 
Despondent, gloomy; very irritable; looses temper easily and gains 
control slowly; miserably cross (Cham.). Mucous membranes of 
mouth, throat, rectum are swollen, burn, feel dry and raw. Coryza; 
thin, watery, burning: rawness and sensitive to inhaled cold air. 
Follicular pharyngitis; violent burning, raw sensation in throat; 
dryness and roughness of throat. Frequent inclination to swallow, 
with burning, pricking, stinging and dry constricted fauces (Apis, 
Bell.). Rectum: dryness and heat of; feets as if full of small sticks; 
knife-like pains shoot up the rectum (Ign., Sulph.); haemorrhoids 
blind, painful, burning purplish; rarely bleeding. Rectum sore, with 
fullness, burning and itching (Sulph.). Constipation: hard, dry 
stool, difficult to pass; with dryness and heat of rectum; severe 
lumbo-sacral backache. Stool followed by fullness of rectum and 
intense pain in anus for hours (Aloe, Ign., Mur. ac., Sulph.). 
Prolapsus uteri and acrid, dark leucorrhoea, with lumbo-sacral 
backache and great fatigue, from walking. Severe dull backache 
in lumbo-sacral articulation; more or less constant; affecting 
sacrum and hips. Back "gives out" during pregnancy, prolapsus, 
leucorrhoea; when walking or stooping; must sit or lie down. 
Sensation of heaviness and lameness in back. Paralytic feeling in 
arms, legs and spine.
Relationship. Similar: to, Aloe, Coll., Ign., Mur. ac., Nux, Sulph., 
in haemorrhoids. After Coll. had improved piles, Aesc often cures. 
Useful after Nux and Sulph. has improved, but failed to cure piles.
Aggravation. Motion; backache and soreness, by walking and 
stooping; inhaling cold air.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Aethusa Cynapium.
Fool's Parsley (Umbelliferae.)
Especially for children during dentition in hot summer weather; 
children who cannot bear milk. Great weakness; children cannot 
stand; unable to hold up the head (Abrot.); prostration with 
sleepiness. Idiocy in children; incapacity to think; confused. An 
expression of great anxiety and pain, with a drawn condition and 
well-marked linea nasalia. Features expressive of pain and anxiety. 
Herpetic eruption on end of the nose. Complete absence of thirst 
(Apis, Puls. - rev of Ars.). Intolerance of milk: cannot bear milk 
in any form; it is vomited in large curds as soon as taken; then 
weakness causes drowsiness (compare Mag. c.). Indigestion of 
teething children; violent, sudden vomiting of a frothy, milk-white 
substance; or yellow fluid, followed by curdled milk and cheesy 
matter. Regurgitation of food and hour or so after eating; copious 
greenish vomiting. Epileptic spasms, with clenched thumbs, red 
face, eyes turned downwards, pupils fixed and dilated; foam at 
the mouth, jaws locked; pulse small, hard, quick. Weakness and 
prostration with sleepiness; after vomiting, after stool, after spasm.
Relationship. - Similar: to Ant. c., Ars., Cal., Sanic.
Aggravation. - After eating or drinking; after vomiting; after stool; 
after spasm.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Agaricus Muscarius.
Toadstool (Fungi.)
Persons with light hair; skin and muscles lax. Old people with 
weak, indolent circulation. Drunkards, especially for their 
headaches; bad effects after a debauch (Lob., Nux, Ran.). 
Delirium: with constant raving; tries to get out of bed; in typhoid 
or typhus. Headaches: of those who readily become delirious in 
fever or with pain (Bell.); of persons subject to chorea, twitchings 
or grimaces; from spinal affections. Chilblains, that itch and burn 
intolerably; frostbite and all consequences of exposure to cold, 
especially in face. Involuntary movements while awake, cease 
during sleep; chorea, form simple motions and jerks of single 
muscles to dancing of whole body; trembling of whole body 
(twitching of muscles of face, Myg.). Sensation as if ice touched or 
ice-cold needles were piercing the skin; as from hot needles. 
Burning, itching, redness of various parts; ears, nose, face, hands 
and feet; parts red, swollen, hot. Uncertainty in walking, stumbles 
over everything in the way; heels pain as if beaten, when standing. 
Spine sensitive to touch (Ther.); worse mornings. Pain: sore, 
aching, in lumbar and sacral regions; during exertion in the day 
time; while sitting (Zinc.). Spinal irritation due to sexual excesses 
(Kali p.). Nervous prostration after sexual debauches. Epilepsy 
from suppressed eruptions (Psor., Sulph.). Every motion, every 
turn of body, causes pain in spine. Single vertebra sensitive to 
touch. Prolapsus, post-climacteric; bearing-down pain almost 
intolerable (compare, Lilium, Murex, Sepia). Exteremely sensitive 
to cold air (Cal., Kali c., Psor.). Complaints appear diagonally; 
upper left and lower right side (Ant. t., Stram. - upper right, lower 
left, Ambr., Brom., Med., Phos., Sul. ac.).
Relationship. - Similar; to, Act., Cal., Can. Ind., Hyos., Kali p., 
Lach., Nux, Op., Stram., in delirium of alcoholism; to, Myg., Tar., 
Zinc., in chorea.
Aggravation. - After eating; after coitus; cold air; mental 
application; before a thunder-storm (Phos., Psor.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Agnus Castus.
Chaste tree (Verbenaceae)
For the lymphatic constitution. Absent-minded, reduced power of  
insight; cannot recollect; has to read a sentence twice before he can 
comprehend (Lyc., Phos. ac., Sep.). "Old sinners," with impotence 
and gleet; unmarried persons suffering from nervous debility. 
Premature old age: melancholy, apathy, mental distraction, self- 
contempt; arising in young persons from abuse of the sexual 
powers; from seminal losses. Complete impotence: relaxation, 
flaccidity, coldness of genitalia. No sexual power or desire (Cald., 
Sel.). Impotence, after frequent attacks of gonorrhoea. Bad effects 
of suppressed gonorrhoea (Med.). Gleet, with absence of sexual 
desire or erections. Leucorrhoea: transparent, but staining linen 
yellow; passes imperceptibly from the very relaxed parts. Deficient 
secretion or suppression of milk in nursing women. (Asaf., Lac. c., 
Lac. d.); often with great sadness; says she will die. Complaints of 
imaginary odor before the nose, as of herring or musk. Prevents 
excoriation, from walking.
Relationship. - Calad. and Selen. follow well after Agnus in 
weakness of sexual organs or impotence.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Allium Cepa.
Onion (Liliaccae)
Acute catarrhal inflammation of mucous membranes, with 
increased secretion. Catarrhal dull headache, with coryza; < in the 
evening, > in open air; < on returning to a warm room (compare, 
Euph., Puls.). Headache ceases during menses; returns when flow 
disappears (Lach., Zinc.). Eyes: burning, biting, smarting as from 
smoke, must rub them; watery and suffused; capillaries injected 
and excessive lachrymation. Coryza: profuse, watery and acrid 
nasal discharge, with profuse, bland lachrymation (profuse, full of 
acrid tears, bland and fluent coryza, Euph.). Acrid, watery 
discharge dropping from tip of nose (Ars., Ars. iod.). Spring 
coryza: after damp northeasterly winds; discharge burns and 
corrodes nose and upper lip. Hay fever; in August every year; 
violent sneezing on rising from bed; from handling peaches. Nasal 
polypus (Mar. v., Sang., Sang. nit., Psor.). Catarrhal laryngitis; 
cough compels patient to grasp the larynx; seems as if cough 
would tear it. Colic: from cold by getting feet wet; over eating; 
from cucumbers; salads; haemorrhoidal; of children; <sitting, > 
moving about. Neuralgic pains like a long thread; in face, head, 
neck, chest. Traumatic chronic neuritis; neuralgia of stump after 
amputation; burning and stinging pains. Panaritia: with red streaks 
up the arm; pains drive to despair; in child-bed. Sore and raw spots 
on feet, especially heel, from friction. Efficacious when feet are 
rubbed sore - Dioscorides. Phlebitis, puerperal; after forceps 
delivery.
Relationship. - Complementary: Phos., Puls., Thuja. Compatible: 
before Cal. and Sil. in polypus. Similar: to, Euph., but coryza and 
lachrymation are opposite. Bad effects from getting wet (Rhus).
Aggravation. - Predominantly in the evening and in warm room 
(Puls. - in open air, Euph.).
Amelioration. - In cold room and open air (Puls.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Aloe Socotrina.
Socotrine Aloes (Liliaceae)
Adapted to indolent, "weary" persons; averse to either mental or 
physical labor; mental labor fatigues. Old people; especially 
women of relaxed, phelgmatic habit. Extreme prostration, with 
perspiration. Itch appears each year, as winter approaches (Psor.). 
Dissatisfied and angry about himself or his complaints, especially 
when constipated. Diseases of mucous membranes; causes the 
production of mucus in jelly-like lumps from throat or rectum; 
affects mucous membrane of rectum. Headache across the 
forehead < by every footstep (Bell., Bry.); with heaviness of eyes 
and nausea. Headaches: are worse from heat, better from cold 
applications (Ars.); alternating with lumbago; after insufficient 
stool. Diarrhoea: has to hurry to closet immediately after eating  
and drinking (Crot. t.); with want of confidence in sphincter ani;  
driving out of bed early in the morning (Psor., Rum., Sulph.). 
When passing flatus, sensation as if stool would pass with it. 
(Olean., Mur. ac., Nat. m.). Colic: cutting, griping pain in right 
lower portion of abdomen; excruciating, before and during stool; 
all pains cease after stool, leaving profuse sweating and extreme 
weakness; attacks preceded by obstinate constipation. Flatus 
offensive, burning copious; much flatus with small stool (Agar.); 
burning in anus after passage of flatus. Solid stool and masses of 
mucus pass involuntarily; hungry during diarrhoea. Before stool: 
rumbling, violent sudden urging; heaviness in rectum; during stool, 
tenesmus and much flatus; after stool faintness. Haemorrhoids: 
blue, like a bunch of grapes (Mur. ac.); constant bearing down in 
rectum; bleeding, sore, tender, hot, relieved by cold water; intense 
itching. Itching and burning in anus, preventing sleep (Ind.).
Relationship. - Like Sulphur in many chronic diseases with 
abdominal plethora and congestion of portal circulation; develops 
suppressed eruptions. Similar: to, Am. m., Gamb., Nux, Pod.
Aggravation. - Early morning; sedentary life; hot dry weather; 
after eating or drinking; standing or walking.
Amelioration. - Cold water; cold weather; discharge of flatus and 
stool.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Alumina.
Pure Clay. (Al2O3.)
Adapted to persons who suffer from chronic diseases; "the Aconite 
of chronic diseases.". Constitutions deficient in animal heat (Cal., 
Sil.). Spare, dry, thin subjects; dark complexion; mild, cheerful 
disposition; hypochondriacs; dry, tettery, itching eruption, worse in 
winter (Petr.); intolerable itching of whole body when getting 
warm in bed (Sulph.); scratches until bleeds, then becomes painful. 
Time passes too slowly; an hour seems half a day (Can. Ind.). 
Inability to walk, except with the eyes open, and in the daytime; 
tottering and falling when closing eyes (Arg. n., Gels.). Abnormal 
appetite; craving for starch, chalk, charcoal, cloves, coffee or tea 
grounds, acids and indigestible things (Cic., Psor.); potatoes  
disagree. Chronic eructations for years; worse in evening. All 
irritating things - salt, wine, vinegar, pepper - immediately produce 
cough. Constipation: no desire for and no ability to pass stool until  
there is a large accumulation (Melil.); great straining, must grasp 
the seat of closet tightly; stool hard, knotty, like laurel berries, 
covered with mucus; of soft, clayey, adhering to parts (Plat.). 
Inactivity of rectum, even soft stool requires great straining 
(Anac., Plat., Sil., Ver.). Constipation: of nursing children, from 
artificial food; bottle-fed babies; of old people (Lyc., Op.); of 
pregnancy, from inactive rectum (Sep.). Diarrhoea when she 
urinates. Has to strain at stool in order to urinate. Leucorrhoea: 
acrid and profuse, running down to the heels (Syph.); worse 
during the daytime; > by cold bathing. After menses: exhausted 
physically and mentally, scarcely able to speak (Carbo an., Coc.). 
Talking fatigues; faint and tired, must sit down.
Relationship. - Complementary: to Bryonia. Follows: Bry., Lach., 
Sulph. Alumina is the chronic of Bryonia. Similar: to Bar. c., Con., 
in ailments of old people.
Aggravation. - In cold air; during winter; while sitting; from 
eating potatoes; after eating soups; on alternate days; at new and 
full moon.
Amelioration. - Mild summer weather; form warm drinks; while  
eating (Psor.); in wet weather (Caust.). Alumina is one of the chief 
antidotes for lead poisoning; painter's colic; ailments from lead.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ambra Grisea.
Ambergris. (A Nosode.)
For children, especially young girls who are excitable, nervous and 
weak; nervous affections of old people, nerves "worn out.". Lean, 
thin, emaciated persons who take cold easily. Great sadness, sits 
for days, weeping. After business embarrassments, unable to sleep, 
must get up (Act., Sep.). Ranula with fetid breath (Thuja). 
Sensation of coldness in abdomen (Cal.). The presence of others, 
even the nurse, is unbearable during stool; frequent, ineffectual 
desire, which makes her anxious. Discharge of blood between 
periods, at every little accident - a long walk, after very hard stool, 
etc. Leucorrhoea; thick, bluish-white mucus, especially or only at 
night (Caust., Mer., Nit. ac.). Violent cough in spasmodic 
paroxysyms, with eructations and hoarseness; worse talking or 
reading aloud (Dros., Phos.); evening without, morning with 
expectoration (Hyos.); whooping cough, but without crowing 
inspiration.
Relationship. - Similar: to, Act., Asaf., Coca, Ign., Mosch., Phos., 
Val.
Aggravation. - Warm drinks, warm room; music; lying down; 
reading or talking aloud; the presence of many people; after 
waking.
Amelioration. - After eating; cold air; cold food and drinks; rising 
form bed.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ammonium Carbonicum.
Smelling Salts. ((NH4O)2CO.)
Haemorrhagic diathesis, fluid blood and degeneration of red blood 
corpuscles; ulcerations tend to gangrene. Stout, fleshy women with 
various troubles in consequence of leading a sedentary life; 
delicate women who must have the "smelling-bottle" continually at 
hand; readily catch cold in the winter. Children dislike washing 
(Ant. c., Sulph.). Loses breath when falling asleep, must awaken to 
get breath (Grind., Lach.). Ill-humor during wet, stormy weather. 
Headache; sensation of fullness, as if forehead would burst (Bell., 
Glon.). Nosebleed: when washing the face (Arn., Mag. c.) and 
hands in the morning, from left nostril; after eating. Ozaena, 
blowing bloody mucus from the nose frequently; blood rushes to 
tip of nose, when stooping. Stoppage of nose, mostly at night; 
must breathe through the mouth, a keynote even in diphtheria; long 
lasting coryza; "snuffles" of infants (Hep., Nux, Samb., Sticta). 
Putrid sore throat; tendency to gangrenous ulceration of tonsils; 
glands engorged. In diphtheria or scarlatina when the nose is  
stopped up; child cannot sleep because it cannot get its breath. 
Cholera-like symptoms at the commencement of menstruation 
(Bov., Ver.). Menses: too early, profuse, preceded by griping colic; 
acrid, makes the thighs sore; copious at night and when sitting 
(Zinc.); with toothache, colic, sadness; fatigue, especially of 
thighs; yawning and chilliness; Leucorrhoea: watery burning from 
the uterus; acrid, profuse from the vagina; excoriation of vulva. 
Dyspnoea with palpitation, worse by exertion or on ascending even 
a few steps; worse in a warm room. One of the best remedies in 
emphysema. Cough: dry, from tickling in throat as from dust, 
every morning from 3 to 4 a. m. (Kali c.). Panaritium: deep seated 
periosteal pain (Dios., Sil.). Body red, as if from scarlatina 
(compare, Ailan.). Malignant scarlatina with deep sleep; stetorous 
breathing. Miliary rash or faintly developed eruption from 
defective vitality; threatened paralysis of brain (Tub., Zinc.).
Relationship. - It antidotes, poisoning with Rhus and sting of 
insects. Affects the right side most. Inimical to Lachesis.
Aggravation. - Cold, wet weather; wet poultices; from washing, 
during menses.
Amelioration. - Lying on abdomen (Acet. ac.); on painful side 
(Puls.); in dry weather.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ammonium Muriaticum.
Sal Ammoniac. (NH4OCl)
Especially adapted to those who are fat and sluggish; or body large 
and fat, but legs too thin. Watery, acrid coryza, corroding the lip 
(All. c.). During menses: diarrhoea and vomiting; bloody discharge 
from the bowels (Phos.); neuralgic pains in the feet; flow more 
profuse at night (Bov. - on lying down, Kreos.). Obstinate 
constipation accompanied by much flatus. Hard, crumbling stools 
require great effort in expulsion; crumble from the verge of anus. 
(Mag. m.); vary in color, no two stools alike (Puls.). 
Haemorrhoids: sore and smarting; with burning and stinging in the 
rectum for hours after stool (Aesc., Sulph.); especially after 
suppressed leucorrhoea. Leucorrhoea; like white of egg, preceded 
by griping pain about the navel; brown, slimy, painless, after every 
urination. Sensation of coldness in the back, between scapulae 
(Lach.). Hamstrings feel painfully short when walking; tension in 
joints as from shortening of the muscles (Caust., Cimex). 
Offensive sweat of the feet (Alum., Graph., Psor., Sanic., Sil.).
Relationship. - Followed: by Ant. c., Phos., Puls., Sanic.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Amylenum Nitrosum.
Nitrite of Amyl (C5H11NO2.)
For nervous, sensitive, plethoric women, during or after 
menopause. Often palliative in incurable cases; very important as 
regards euthanasia. Rapidly dilates the arteries and accelerates, but 
later weakens and retards the pulse. Intense surging of blood to 
face and head (Bell., Glon.). Craves fresh air; opens clothing, 
removes bed covering and opens windows in the coldest weather 
(Arg. n., Lach., Sulph.). Flushings: start from face, stomach, 
various parts of body, followed by sweatings, often hot, profuse; 
abruptly limited, parts below are icy cold; followed by great 
prostration. Face flushes at the slightest emotion (Coca, Fer.). 
Blushing: chronic or acute; sea sickness. Hemicrania, especially 
when afflicted side is pallid. Collar seems too tight, must loosen it 
(Lach.). Angina pectoris; tumultuous heart action; intense 
throbbing of heart and carotids (Glon.). Constant stretching for 
hours; impossible to satisfy the desire; would seize the bed and call 
for help to stretch. Profound and repeated yawning (Kali c.). 
Puerperal convulsions immediately after delivery.
Relationship. - Similar: to, Bell., Cac., Coca, Fer., Glon., Lach.
Aggravation. - Mental or physical exertion. Acts promptly by 
inhalation; resuscitates persons sinking under anaesthetics. Crude 
drug chiefly palliative; must be repeated as patient becomes 
accustomed to it; is curative in the stronger higher potencies. The 
cure more frequently depends upon the strength of the potency 
than many who have not put it to the curative test imagine.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Anacardium Orientale.
Marking Nut. (Anacardiaceae.)
Sudden loss of memory; everything seems to be in a dream; 
patient is greatly troubles about his forgetfulness; confused, unfit 
for business. Disposed to be malacious, seems bent on wickedness. 
Irresistible desire to curse and swear (Lac. c., Lil., Nit. ac. - wants 
to pray continually, Stram.). Lack of confidence in himself and 
others. Feels as though he had two wills, one commanding him to 
do what the other forbids. When walking, is anxious, as if some 
one were pursuing him; suspects everything around him. Weakness 
of all the senses. Hypochondriac, with haemorrhoids and 
constipation. Strange temper, laughs at serious matters and is 
serious over laughable things. Thinks herself a demon; curses and 
swears. Sensation as of a hoop or band around a part (Cac., Carb. 
ac., Sulph.). Headache: relieved entirely when eating (Psor.); when 
lying down in bed at night, and when about falling asleep; worse 
during motion and work. Gastric and nervous headaches of 
sedentary persons (Arg. n., Bry., Nux). Apt to choke when eating 
and drinking (Can. s., Kava kava, Nit. ac.). Swallows foods and 
drink hastily; symptoms disappear while eating (Kali p., Psor.). 
Stomach: sensation of fasting "all gone," comes one only when 
stomach is empty and is > by eating (Chel., Iod.); > during process 
of digestion (rev. of Bry., Nux). Warts on palms of hands (Nat. 
m.). Great desire of stool, but with the effort the desire passes 
away without evacuation; rectum seems powerless, paralyzed, with 
sensation as if plugged up (irregular peristaltic or over action, 
Nux).
Relations. - Compare: Rhus r., Rhus t., and Rhus v. Symptoms are 
prone to go from right to left (Lyc.). Anacardium follows well: 
after Lyc., and Puls. Anacardium follows, and is followed by 
Platina.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Anthracinum.
Anthrax Poison. (A Nosode)
In carbuncle, malignant ulcer and complaints with ulceration,  
sloughing and intolerable burning. When Arsenicum or the best 
selected remedy fails to relieve the burning pain of carbuncle or 
malignant ulceration. Haemorrhages: blood oozes from mouth, 
nose, anus or sexual organs; black, thick, tar-like, rapidly 
decomposing (Crot.). Septic fever, rapid loss of strength, sinking 
pulse, delirium and fainting (Pyr.). Gangrenous ulcers; felon, 
carbuncle, erysipelas of a malignant type. Felon: the worst cases, 
with sloughing and terrible burning pain (Ars., Carb. ac., Lach.). 
Malignant pustule; black or blue blisters; often fatal in twenty- 
four or forty-eight hours (Lach., Pyr.). Carbuncle; with horrible  
burning pains; discharge of ichorous offensive pus. Dissecting 
wounds, especially if tendency is to become gangrenous; septic 
fever, marked prostration (Ars., Pyr.). Suspicous insect stings. If 
the swelling changes color and red streaks from the wound map 
out the course of lymphatics (Lach., Pyr.). Septic inflammation 
from absorption or pus or other deleterious substances, with 
burning pain and great prostration (Ars., Pyr.). Epidemic spleen 
diseases of cattle, horses and sheep. Bad effects from inhaling foul 
odors of putrid fever or dissecting-room; poisoning by foul breath 
(Pyr.). Hering says: "To call a carbuncle a surgical disease is the 
greatest absurdity. An incision is always injurious and often fatal. 
A case has never been lost under the right kind of treatment, and it 
should always be treated by internal medicine only.".
Relations. - Similar: to, Ars., Carb. ac., Lach., Sec., Pyr., in 
malignant and septic conditions. Compare: Euphor. in the terrible 
pains of cancer, carbuncle or erysipelas when Ars. or Anth. fail to 
>.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Antimony Crudum.
Sulphide of Antimony. (SbS3.)
For children and young people inclined to grow fat (Cal.); for the 
extremes of life. Old people with morning diarrhoea, suddenly 
become constipated, or alternate diarrhoea and constipation; pulse 
hard and rapid. Sensitive to the cold. < after taking cold. Child is 
fretful, peevish, cannot bear to be touched or looked at; sulky, 
does not wish to speak or be spoken to (Ant. t., Iod., Sil.); angry at 
every little attention. Great sadness, with weeping. Loathing life. 
Anxious lachrymose mood, the slightest thing affects her (Puls.); 
abject despair, suicide by drowning. Irresistible desire to talk in 
rhymes or repeat verses. Sentimental mood in the moonlight, 
especially ecstatic love; bad effects of disappointed affection (Cal. 
p.). Nostrils and labial commissures sore, cracked and crusty. 
Headache: after river bathing; from taking cold; alcoholic drinks; 
deranged digestion, acids, fat, fruit; suppressed eruption. Gastric 
complaints from over-eating; stomach weak, digestion easily 
disturbed; a thick milky-white coating on the tongue, which is 
the red strand of the remedy; very subject to canker sores in the 
mouth (Arg. n., Sulph.). Longing for acids and pickles. Gastric and 
intestinal affections: from bread and pastry; acids, especially 
vinegar; sour or bad wine; after cold bathing; over-heating; hot 
weather. Constant discharge of flatus, up and down, for years; 
belching, tasting of ingesta. Mucus: in large quantities from 
posterior nares by hawking; from anus, ichorous, oozing, staining 
yellow; mucous piles. Disposition to abnormal growths of the skin; 
fingernail do not grow rapidly; crushed nails grow is splits like 
warts and with horny spots. Large horny corns on soles of feet 
(Ran. b.); very sensitive when walking, especially on stone 
pavements. Loss of voice from becoming over-heated. Cannot bear 
the heat of the sun; worse from over-exertion in the sun. (Lach., 
Nat. m.); < from over-heating near the fire; exhausted in warm 
weather; ailments from sunburn. Whooping cough: < by being 
over-heated in the sun or in a warm room; from cold washing. 
When symptoms reappear they change locality or go from one side 
of the body to the other. Aversion to cold bathing; child cries 
when washed or bathed with cold water; cold bathing causes 
violent headache; causes suppressed menses; colds from 
swimming or falling into the water (Rhus).
Relations. - Complementary: Squilla. Similar: to, Bry;, Ipec., Lyc., 
Puls., in gastric complaints. Follows well: after, Ant. c., Puls., 
Mer., Sulph.
Aggravation. - After eating; cold baths, acids or sour wine; after  
heat of sun or fire; extremes of cold or heat.
Amelioration. - In the open air; during rest; after a warm bath.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Antimonium Tartaricum.
Tartar Emetic.
Adapted to torpid, phelgmatic persons; the hydrogenoid 
constitution (of Grauvogl). Diseases originating from exposure in 
damp basements or cellars (Ars., Aran., Tereb.). Through the 
pneumogastric nerve it depresses the respiration and circulation, 
thus producing the keynote of the remedy, viz., when the patient  
coughs there appears to be a large collection of mucus in the  
bronchi; it seems as if much would be expectorated, but nothing 
comes up. Child clings to those around; wants to be carried; cries 
and whines if any one touches it; will not let you feel the pulse 
(Ant. c., Sanic.). Face cold, blue, pale, covered with cold sweat 
(Tab.). Tongue coated pasty, thick, white, with reddened papillae 
and red edges; red in streaks; very red, dry in the middle; 
extraordinary craving for apples (Aloe- for acids, pickles, Ant. c.). 
Vomiting: in any position except lying on right side; until he 
faints; followed by drowsiness and prostration; of cholera morbus 
with diarrhoea and cold sweat, a dose after each attack (Ver.). 
Asphyxia: mechanical, as apparent death from drowning; from 
mucus in bronchi; from impeding paralysis of lungs; from foreign 
bodies in larynx or trachea; with drowsiness and coma. Great  
sleepiness or irresistible inclination to sleep, with nearly all 
complaints (Nux m., Op.). Child at birth pale, breathless, gasping; 
asphyxia neonatorum. Relieves the "death rattle" (Taran.). Icterus 
with pneumonia, especially of right lung.
Relations. - Similar: to Lycopodium; but spasmodic motion of the 
alae is replaced by dilated nostrils; to Veratrum, both have 
diarrhoea, colic, vomiting, coldness and craving for acids; to 
Ipecac, but more drowsiness from defective respiration; nausea, 
but > after vomiting. When lungs seem to fail, patient becomes 
sleepy, cough declines or ceases, it supplants Ipec. For bad effects 
of vaccination when Thuja fails and Silicea is not indicated. Before 
Silicea in dyspnoea from foreign bodies in the larynx or trachea; 
Puls. in suppressed gonorrhoea; Tereb. from damp basements. 
Children not easily impressed when Ant. tart. seems indicated in 
coughs, require Hepar. In spring and autumn, when damp weather 
commences, coughs of children get worse.
Aggravation. - In damp, cold weather; lying down at night; 
warmth of room; change of weather in spring (Kali s., Nat. s.).
Amelioration. - Cold open air; sitting upright; expectorating; lying 
of right side (Tab.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Apis Mellifica.
Poison of the Honey Bee (Apium virus.)
Adapted to the strumous constitution; glands enlarged, indurated; 
scirrhus or open cancer. Women, specially widows; children and 
girls who, though generally careful, become awkward, and let 
things fall while handling them (Bov.). Bad effects of acute 
exanthema imperfectly developed or suppressed (Zinc.); measles, 
scarlatina, urticaria. Ailments from jealousy, fright, rage, vexation, 
bad news. Irritable; nervous; fidgety; hard to please. Weeping 
disposition; cannot help crying; discouraged, despondent (Puls.). 
Sudden shrill, piercing screams from children while waking or 
sleeping (Hellebore). Oedema; bag-like, puffy swelling under the 
eyes (over the eyes, Kali c.); of the hands and feet, dropsy, without 
thirst (with thirst, Acet. ac., Apoc.). Extreme sensitiveness to touch 
(Bell., Lach.). Pain: burning, stinging, sore; suddenly migrating 
from one part to another (Kali bi., Lac c., Puls.). Thirstlessness: in 
anasarca; acites (Acetic acid, but face more waxy and great thirst). 
Incontinence of urine, with great irritation of the parts; can 
scarcely retain the urine a moment, and when passed scalds 
severely; frequent, painful, scanty, bloody. Constipation: sensation 
in abdomen as if something tight would break if much effort were 
used. Diarrhoea: of drunkards; in eruptive diseases, especially if 
eruption be suppressed; involuntary from every motion, as though 
anus were wide open (Phos.). Affects right side; enlargement or 
dropsy of right ovary; right testicle. Intermittent fever; chill 3 p. 
m., with thirst, always (Ign.); < warm room and from external heat 
(Thuja, 3 a. m., and at 3 p. m.).
Relations. - Complementary: Nat. mur. Disagrees, when used 
either before or after Rhus. Ars. and Puls. follow Apis well. Has 
cured scarlatina albuminuria after Canth., Dig., Hell. failed.
Aggravation. - After sleeping (Lach.); closed, especially warmed 
and heated rooms are intolerable; from getting wet (Rhus), but 
better from washing or moistening the part in cold water.
Amelioration. - Open air; cold water or cold bathing; uncovering; 
pains by coughing, walking or changing position; when sitting 
erect;
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Apocynum Cannabinum.
Indian Hemp. (Apocynaceae)
Excretions diminished, especially urine and sweat. Dropsy of 
serous membranes; acute, inflammatory. Dropsy: with thirst (Acet. 
ac.), water disagrees or is vomited (Ars.); most cases 
uncomplicated with organic diseases; after typhus, typhoid, 
scarlatina, cirrhosis; after abuse of quinine. Acute hydrocephalus, 
with open sutures; stupor, sight of one eye lost; constant and 
voluntary motion of one arm and one leg (left arm and leg, Bry.); 
forehead projected. Amenorrhoea in young girls, with bloating or 
dropsical extension of abdomen and extremities. Metorrhagia: 
continued or paroxysmal flow; fluid or clotted; nausea, vomiting, 
palpitation; pulse quick, feeble, when moved; vital depression, 
fainting, when raising head from pillow. Cough, short and dry, or 
deep and loose, during pregnancy (Con.).
Relations. - Similar: to, Acetic Acid, Apis (no thirst), Ars., Cinch., 
Dig., in dropsical affections. Blatta orientalis has cured bad cases 
of general dropsy, after Apis, Apoc. and Dig. failed. - Haynes.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Argentum Metallicum.
The Metal. (Pure Silver)
Tall, thin, irritable persons. Ailments from abuse of Mercury. 
Constitutional effects of onanism. Affects the cartilages, tarsal, 
ears, nose, Eustachian; the structures entering into joints. Seminal 
emissions: after onanism; almost every night; without erection; 
with atrophy of penis. Crushed pain in the testicles (Rhod.). 
Prolapsus; with pain in left ovary and back, extending forward and 
downward (right ovary, Pal.); climacteric haemorrhage. 
Exhausting, fluent coryza with sneezing. Hoarseness; of 
professional singers, public speakers (Alum., Arum. t.). Total loss 
of voice of professional singers. Throat and larynx feel raw or sore 
on swallowing or coughing. Laughing excites cough (Dros., Phos., 
Stan.) and produces profuse mucus in larynx. When reading aloud 
has to hem and hawk; cough with easy expectoration of gelatinous, 
viscid mucus, looking like boiled starch. Great weakness of the 
chest (Stan.); worse left side. Alternation in timbre of voice with 
singers and public speakers (Arum t.). Raw spot over bifurcation of 
the trachea. worse when using voice, talking or singing.
Relation. - Follows well: after, Alum. Similar: to, Stan. in cough 
excited by laughing.
Aggravation. - Riding in a carriage (Coc.); when touched or 
pressed upon; talking, singing, reading aloud.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Argentum Nitricum.
The Silver Nitrate (AgO,NO5)
Acute or chronic diseases fro unusual or long-continued mental  
exertion. Always think of Argentum nit. on seeing withered, dried-
up, old-looking patients (thin, scrawny, Sec.). Emaciation, 
progressing every year; most marked in lower extremeties (Am. 
m.); marasmus. Apprehension when ready for church or opera, 
diarrhoea sets in (Gels.). Time passes slowly (Can. I.); impulsive, 
wants to do things in a hurry; must walk fast; is always hurried; 
anxious, irritable, nervous (Aur. Lit.). Headache: congestive, with 
fullness and heaviness; with sense of expansion; habitual gastric, of 
literary men; from dancing; hemicrania, pressive, screwing in 
frontal eminence or temple; ending in bilious vomiting; < from any 
exhaustive mental labor; > by pressure or tight bandaging (Apis, 
Puls.). Acute granular conjunctivitis; scarlet-red, like raw beef; 
discharge profuse, muco-purulent. Ophthalmia neonatorum: 
profuse, purulent discharge; cornea opaque, ulceration; lids sore, 
thick, swollen; agglutinated in morning (Apis, Mer. s., Rhus). Eye 
strain from sewing, < in warm room > in open air (Nat. m., Ruta); 
diseases due to defective accommodation. Craves sugar; child is 
fond of it, but diarrhoea results from eating (craves salt or smoked 
meat, Cal. p.). Belching accompanies most gastric ailments. 
Flatulent dyspepsia: belching after every meal; stomach, as it it 
would burst with wind; belching difficult, finally air rushes out 
with great violence. Diarrhoea: green mucus, like chopped spinach 
in flakes; turning green after remaining on diaper; after drinking;  
after eating candy or sugar; masses of muco-lymph in shreddy 
strips or lumps (Asar.); with much noisy flatus (Aloe.). Diarrhoea 
as soon as he drinks (Ars., Crot. t., Throm.). Urine passes 
unconsciously day and night (Caust.). Impotence: erection fails 
when coition is attempted (Agnus, Calad., Selen.). Coition: painful 
in both sexes; followed by bleeding from vagina (Nit. ac.). 
Netrorrhagia: in young widows; in sterility; with nervous erethism 
at change of life (Lach.). Great longing for fresh air (Amyl., Puls., 
Sulph.). Chronic laryngitis of singers; the high notes cause cough 
(Alum., Arg. m., Arum.). Great weakness of lower extremities, 
with trembling; cannot walk with the eyes closed (Alum.). Walks 
and stands unsteadily, especially when he thinks himself 
unobserved. Convulsions preceded by great restlessness. Sensation 
of a splinter in throat when swallowing (Dolch., Hep., Nit. ac., 
Sil.); in or about uterus when walking or riding. Chilly when 
uncovered, yet feels smothered if wrapped up; craves fresh air.
Relation. - Natrum mur, for the bad effects of cauterizing with 
nitrate of silver. Coffee increases nervous headache. Boys' 
complaints after using tabacco (Ars., Ver.). Similar: to, Nat. m., 
Nit. ac., Lach., Aur., Cup. After Ver.; Lyc. follows well in flatulent 
dyspepsia.
Aggravation. - Cold food; cold air; eating sugar; ice cream; 
unusual mental exertion.
Amelioration. - Open air; craves the wind blowing in his face; 
bathing with cold water. The 200 or 1000th potency in watery 
solution as a topical application in ophthalmia neonatorum has 
relieved when the crude Silver nitrate failed.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Arnica Montana.
Leopard's Bane (Compositae)
Nervous women, sanguine plethoric persons, lively expression and 
very red face. For the bad effects resulting from mechanical 
injuries; even if received years ago. Especially adapted to those 
who remain long impressed by even slight mechanical injuries. 
Sore, lame, bruised feeling all through the body, as if beaten; 
traumatic affections of muscles. Mechanical injuries, especially 
with stupor from concussion; involuntary faeces and urine; After 
injuries with blunt instruments (Symph.). Compound fractures and 
their profuse suppuration (Calend.). Concussions and contusions, 
results of shock or injury; with laceration of soft parts; prevents 
suppuration and septic conditions and promotes absorption. 
Nervous, cannot bear pain; whole body over-sensitive (Cham., 
Coff., Ign.). Everything on which he lies seems too hard; 
complains constantly of it and keeps moving from place to place in 
search of a soft spot (the parts rested upon feel sore and bruised, 
Bap., Pyr.; must move continually to obtain relief from pain, 
Rhus). Heat of upper body; coldness of lower. The face or head 
and face alone is hot, the body cool. Unconsciousness; when 
spoken to answers correctly but unconsciousness and delirium at 
once return (falls asleep in the midst of a sentence, Bap.). Says 
there is nothing the matter with him. Meningitis after mechanical 
or traumatic injuries; from falls, concussions of brain, etc. When 
suspecting exudation of blood, to facilitate absorption 
Hydrocephalus; deathly coldness in forearm of children (in 
diarrhoea, Brom.). Apoplexy; loss of consciousness, involuntary 
evacuation from bowels and bladder; in acute attack, controls 
haemorrhage and aids absorption; should be repeated and allowed 
to act for days or weeks unless symptoms call for another remedy. 
Conjunctival or retinal haemorrhage, with extravasation, form 
injuries or cough (Led., Nux.). Gout and rheumatism, with great  
fear of being touched or struck by persons coming near him. 
Cannot walk erect on account of a bruised sort of feeling in the 
pelvic region. Tendency to small, painful boils, one after another, 
extremely sore (small boils in crops, Sulph.). Paralysis (left-sided); 
pulse full strong; stertor, sighing, muttering. Belching; eructations; 
foul, putrid, like rotten eggs. Dysentery; with ischuria, fruitless 
urging; long interval between the stools. Constipation: rectum 
loaded, faeces will not come away; ribbon like stools from 
enlarged prostrate or retroverted uterus. Soreness of parts after 
labor; prevents post-partum haemorrhage and puerperal 
complications. Retention or incontinence of urine after labor (Op.).
Relation. - Complementary: to, Acon., Hyper., Rhus. Similar: to, 
for soreness as if bruised, Bap., China, Phyt., Pyr., Rhus, Ruta, 
Staph. Arnica follows well: after, Acon., Apis., Ham., Ipec., Ver., 
is followed by Sul. ac. In ailments from spiritous liquors or from 
charcoal vapors, Arn. is often indicated (Am. c., Bov.). In spinal 
concussion, compare, Hyper.
Aggravation. - At rest; when lying down; from wine.
Amelioration. - From contact; motion (Rhus, Ruta).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Arsenic Album.
White Oxide of Arsenic (As2O3.)
Great prostration, with rapid sinking of the vital forces; fainting: 
The disposition is:
   a - Depressing, melancholic, disparing, indifferent.
   b - Anxious, fearful, restless, full of anguish.
   c - Irritable, sensitive, peevish, easily vexed.
The greater the suffering, the greater the anguish, restlessness and 
fear of death. Mentally restless, but physically too weak to move; 
cannot rest in any place: changing places continually; wants to be 
moved from one bed to another, and lies now here now there. 
Anxious fear of death; thinks it useless to take medicine, is  
incurable, is surely going to die; dread of death, when alone, or, 
going to bed. Attacks of anxiety at night driving out of bed, < after 
midnight. Burning pains; the affected parts burn like fire, as if 
hot coals were applied to parts (Antr.), > by heat, hot drinks, hot 
applications. Burning thirst without special desire to drink; the 
stomach does not seem to tolerate, because it cannot assimilate 
cold water; lies like a stone in the stomach. It is wanted, but he 
cannot or dare not drink it. Cannot bear the smell or sight of food 
(Colch., Sep.). Great thirst for cold water; drinks often, but little at  
a time; eats seldom, but much. Gastric derangements; after cold 
fruits; ice cream; ice water; sour beer; bad sausage; alcoholic 
drinks; strong cheese. Teething children are pale, weak, fretful, and 
want to be carried rapidly. Diarrhoea, after eating or drinking; 
stool scanty, dark-colored, offensive, and whether small or large, 
followed by great prostration. Haemorrhoids: with stitching pain 
when walking or sitting, not at stool; preventing sitting or sleep; 
burning pain >  by heat; fissures make voiding urine difficult. 
Breathing: asthmatic; must sit or bend forward; springs out of bed 
at night, especially after twelve o'clock; unable to lie down for fear 
of suffocation; attacks like croup instead of the usual urticaria. 
Rapid emaciation: with cold sweat and great debility (Tub., Ver.); 
of affected parts; marasmus. Anasarca, skin pale, waxy, earth-
colored (Acet. ac.). Excessive exhaustion from least exertion. 
Exhaustion is not felt by the patient while lying still; when he 
moves he is surprised to find himself so weak. Symptoms 
generally worse 1-2 p. m., 12-2 a. m. Skin: dry and scaly; cold, 
blue and wrinkled; with cold, clammy perspiration; like 
parchment; white and pasty; black vesicles and burning pain. Bad 
effects from decayed food or animal matter, whether by 
inoculation, olfaction or ingestion. Complaints return annually 
(Carbo. v., Lach., Sulph., Thuja).
Relation. - Complementary: Allium s., Carbo. v., Phos., Pyr. Ars. 
should be thought of in ailments from: chewing tabacco;  
alcoholism; sea bathing; sausage poisoning; dissecting woulds and 
anthrax poison; stings of venomous insects.
Aggravation. - After midnight (1 to 2 a. m. or p. m.); from cold;  
cold drinks or food; when lying on affected side or with the head 
low.
Amelioration. - From heat in general (reverse of Sec.) except 
headache, which is temporarily > by cold bathing (Spig.); burning 
pain > by heat.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Arum Triphyllum.
Indian Turnip (Araceae)
Coryza; acrid, fluent; nostrils raw. Nose feels stopped up in spite 
of the watery discharge (compare, Am. c., Samb., Sinap.); sneezing 
< at night. Acrid, ichorous discharge, excoriating inside of nose, 
alae, and upper lip (Ars., Cepa). Constant picking at the nose 
until it bleeds; boring with the finger into the side of the nose. 
Picks lips until they bleed; corners of the mouth sore, cracked, 
bleeding (with malignant tendency, Cund.); bites nails until fingers 
bleed. Patients pick and bore into the raw bleeding surfaces though 
very painful; scream with pain but keep up the boring (in 
diphtheria, scarlatina, typhoid). Children refuse food and drink on 
account of soreness of mouth and throat (Mer.); are sleepless. 
Saliva profuse, acrid, corrodes the mucous membrane; tongue and 
buccal cavity raw and bleeding. Aphonia: complete, after exposure 
to northwest winds (Acon., Hep.); from singing (Arg. n., Caust., 
Phos., Sel.). Clergyman's sore throat; voice hoarse, uncertain, 
uncontrollable, changing continually; worse from talking, speaking 
or singing; orators, singers, actors. Desquamation in large flakes, a 
second or third time, in scarlatina. Typhoid scarlatina, with apathy, 
scanty or suppressed urine; threatened uraemia. The sore mouth 
and nose are guiding in malignant scarlatina and diphtheria.
Relations. - Useful: after Hep. and Nit. ac. in dry, hoarse, croupy 
cough; after Caust. and Hep. in morning hoarseness and deafness, 
and in scarlatina. Should not be given low or repeated often as bad 
effects often follow. - Dr. L. The higher potencies most prompt and 
effective.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Asarum Europaeum.
European Snake Root (Arsistolochiaceae)
Nervous, anxious people; excitable or melancholy. Imagines he is 
hovering in the air like a spirit (Lac. c.); lightness of all the limbs. 
Cold "shivers" from any emotion. Oversensitiveness of nerves, 
scratching of linen or silk, crackling of paper is unbearable 
(Fer. Tar.). Sensation as if ears were plugged up with some foreign 
substance. When reading, sensation in eyes as if thy would be 
pressed asunder or outward; relieved by bathing them in cold 
water. Cold air or cold water very pleasant to the eyes; sunshine, 
light, and wind are intolerable. Nausea: in attacks or constant 
(Ipec.); < after eating, tongue clean (Sulph.); of pregnancy. 
Unconquerable longing for alcohol; a popular remedy in Russia for 
drunkards. "Horrible sensation" of pressing, digging in the stomach 
when waking in the morning (after a debauch). Great faintness and 
constant yawning.
Relation. - Similar: to, Caust. in modalities; to Aloe, Arg. n., Mer., 
Pod., Puls., Sulph. ac. in stringy shreddy stools. Followed: by, Bis., 
Caust., Puls., Sulph. ac.
Aggravation. - In cold and dry, or clear, fine weather (Caust.).
Amelioration. - Washing face or bathing affected parts with cold 
water; in damp, wet weather (Caust.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Asterias Rubens.
Star-fish (Radiata)
For the sycotic diathesis; flabby, lymphatic constitution; irritable 
temperament. Easily excited by any emotion, especially by 
contradictions (Anac., Con.). Heat of the head, as if surrounded by 
hot air. Sanguineous congestion to the brain. Apoplexy; face red, 
pulse hard, full, frequent. Cancer of mammae; acute lancinating  
pain; drawing pain in breast; swollen, distended, as before the 
menses; breast feels drawn in. A livid red spot appeared, broke and 
discharged; gradually invaded entire breast, very fetid odor; edges 
pale, clevated, mamillary, hard, everted; bottom covered with 
reddish granulations. Gait unsteady: muscles refuse to obey the 
will (Alum., Gels.). Epilepsy: twitching over the whole body four 
or five days before the attack. Constipation: obstinate; ineffectual 
desire; stools of hard, round balls, like olives. Diarrhoea: watery, 
brown, gushing out in a violent jet (Crot. t., Grat., Gum., Jatr., 
Thuja). Sexual desire increased in women (Lit.).
Relations. - Similar: to, Murex, Sepia. Compare: Carbo an., Con., 
Sil. in mammary cancer; Bell., Cal., Sulph. in epilepsy
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Aurum Metallicum.
Gold (The Element)
Sanguine, ruddy people, with black hair and eyes; lively, restless, 
anxious about the future. Old people; weak vision; corpulent; tired 
of life. For constitutions broken down by bad effects of mercury 
and syphillis. Pinning boys; low-spirited, lifeless, weak memories, 
lacking in "boyish go;" testes undeveloped, mere pendent shreds. 
Constantly dwelling on suicide (Naja - but is afraid to die, Nux). 
Profound melancholy: feels hateful and quarrelsome; desire to 
commit suicide; life is a constant burden; after abuse of mercury; 
with nearly all complaints. Uneasy, hurried, great desire for mental 
and physical activity; cannot do things fast enough (Arg. n.). 
Ailments from fright, anger, contradictions, mortification, 
vexation, dread, or reserved displeasure (Staph.). Oversensitive: 
least contradiction excites wrath (Con.); to pain; to smell, taste, 
hearing, touch (Anac.). Headache of people with dark olive-brown 
complexion; sad, gloomy, taciturn; disposed to constipation; from 
least mental exertion. Falling of the hair, especially in syphillis and 
mercurial affections. Hemiopia; sees only the lower half (sees only 
the left half, Lith. c., Lyc.). Syphilitic and mercurial affections of 
the bones. Caries: of the nasal palatine and mastoid bones; ozaena, 
otorrhoea, excessively fetid discharge, pains worse at night; drive 
to despair; of mercurial or syphilitic origin (Asaf.). Prolapsed and 
indurated uterus; from over-reaching or straining (Pod., Rhus); 
from hypertrophy (Con.). Menstrual and uterine affections, with 
great melancholy; < at menstrual period. Foul breath; in girls at 
puberty. Sensation as if the heart stood still; as though it ceased to 
beat and then suddenly gave on hard thump (Sep.). Violent 
palpitation; anxiety, with congestion of blood to head and chest 
after exertion; pulse small, feeble, rapid, irregular; visible, beating 
of carotid and temporal arteries (Bell., Glon.). Fatty degeneration 
of heart (Phos.).
Relations. - Aurum follows, and is followed well by Syphillinum. 
Similar: to, Asaf., Cal., Plat., Sep., Tar., Ther., in bone, uterine 
disease.
Aggravation. - In cold air; when getting cold; while lying down; 
mental exertion; many complaints come on only in winter.
Amelioration. - In warm air, when growing warm, in the morning 
and during summer.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Baptisia Tinctoria.
Wild Indigo. (Leguminosae)
For the lymphatic temperament. Great prostration, with disposition 
to decomposition of fluids (Pyr.); ulceration of mucous 
membranes. All exhalations and discharges fetid, especially in 
typhoid or other acute disease; breath, stool, urine, perspiration, 
ulcers (Psor., Pyr.). Aversion to mental exertion; indisposed, or 
want of power to think. Perfect indifference, don't care to do 
anything, inability ot fix the mind to work. Stupor; falls asleep 
while being spoken to or in the midst of his answer (when spoken 
to, answers correctly, but delirium returns at once, Arn.). Tongue: 
at first coated white with red papillae; dry and yellow-brown in 
center; later dry, cracked, ulcerated. Face flushed, dusky, dark-red, 
with a stupid, besotted drunken expression (Gels.). Can swallow 
liquids only (Bar. c.); least solid food gags (can swallow liquids 
only, but has aversion to them, Sil.). Painless sore throat; tonsils, 
soft palate and parotids dark red, swollen; putrid, offensive 
discharge (Diph.). Dysentry of old people; diarrhoea of children, 
especially when very offensive (Carbo v., Pod., Psor.). Cannot go 
to sleep because she cannot get herself together; head or body feels 
scattered about the bed; tosses about to get the pieces together; 
thought she was three persons, could not keep them covered 
(Petr.). In whatever position the patient lies, the parts rested 
upon feel sore and bruised (Pyr. - compare, Arn., Pyr.). 
Decubitus in typhoid (Arn., Mur. ac., Pyr.).
Relation. - Similar: to, Arn., Ars., Bry., Gels., in the early stages 
of fever with malaise, nervousness, flushed face, drowsiness, and 
muscular soreness. When Ars. has been properly given or too often 
repeated in typhoid or typhus. After Baptisia: Crot., Ham., Nit. ac. 
and Tereb. act well in haemorrhage of typhoid and typhus.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Baryta Carbonica.
Barium Carbonate. (BaCO3.)
Especially adapted to complaints of first and second childhood; the 
psoric or tubercular. Memory deficient; forgetful, inattentive; child 
cannot be taught for it cannot remember; threatened idiocy. 
Scrofulous, dwarfish children who do not grow (children who 
grow too rapidly, Cal.); scrofulous ophthalmia, cornea opaque; 
abdomen swollen; frequent attacks of colic; face bloated; general 
emaciation. Children both physically and mentally weak. Dwarfish, 
hysterical women and old maids with scanty menses; deficient 
heat, always cold and chilly. Old, cachetic people; scrofulous, 
especially when fat; or those who suffer from gouty complaints 
(Fluor. ac.). Diseases of old men; hypertrophy or induration of 
prostrate and testes; mental and physical weakness. Apoplectic 
tendency in old people; complaints of old drunkards; headache of 
aged people, who are childish. Persons subject to quinsy, take cold 
easily, or with every, even the least, cold have an attack of 
tonsillitis prone to suppuration (Hep., Psor.). Inability to swallow 
anything but liquids (Bap., Sil.). Haemorrhoids protrude every time 
he urinates (Mur. ac.). Chronic cough in psoric children; enlarged 
tonsils or elongated uvula; < after slight cold (Alum.). Swelling  
and indurations, or incipient suppuration of glands, especially 
cervical and inguinal. Offensive foot sweat; toes and soles get sore; 
of the heels; throat affections after checked foot sweat (compare, 
Graph., Psor., Sanic., Sil.). Great sensitiveness to cold (Cal., Kali 
c., Psor.).
Relation. - Frequently useful before or after Psor., Sulph., and 
Tub. After Bar. c., Psor will often eradicate the constitutional 
tendency to quinsy. Similar: to, Alum, Cal. iod., Dul., Fluor. ac., 
Iod., Sil. Icompatible: after Calc. in scrofulous affections.
Aggravation. - When thinking of his disease (Oxal. ac.); lying on 
painful side; after meals; washing affected parts.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Belladonna.
Deadly Nightshade. (Solanaceae)
Adapted to bilious, lymphatic, plethoric constitutions; persons who 
are lively and entertaining when well, but violent and often 
delerious when sick. Women and children with light hair and blue 
eyes, find complexion, delicate skin; sensitive, nervous, threatened 
with convulsions; tuberculous patients. Great liability to take cold; 
sensitive to drafts of air, especially when uncovering the head; 
from having the hair cut; tonsils become inflamed after riding in a 
cold wind (Acon., Hep., Rhus - takes cold from exposure of feet, 
Con., Cup., Sil.). Quick sensation and motion; eyes snap and move 
quickly; pains come suddenly, last indefinitely and cease suddenly 
(Mag. p.). Pains usually in short attacks; cause redness of face 
and eyes; fulness of head and throbbing of carotids. Imagines he 
sees ghosts, hideous faces, and various insects (Stram.); black 
animals, dogs, wolves. Fear of imaginary things, wants to run away 
from them; hallucinations. Violent delirium; disposition to bite, 
spit, strike and tear things; breaks into fits of laughter and gnashes 
the teeth; wants to bite and strike the attendants (Stram.); tries to 
escape (Hell.). Head hot and painful; face flushed; eyes wild, 
staring, pupils dilated; pulse full and bounding, globular, like 
buckshot striking the finger; mucous membrane of mouth dry; 
stool tardy and urine suppressed; sleepy; but cannot sleep (Cham., 
Op.). Convulsions during teething, with fever (without fever, Mag. 
p.); come on suddenly, head hot, feet cold. Rush of blood to head 
and face (Amyl., Glon., Mel.). Headache, congestive, with red 
face, throbbing of brain and carotids (Met.); < from slight noise, 
jar, motion, light, lying down, least exertion; > pressure, tight 
bandaging, wrapping up, during menses. Boring the head into the 
pillow (Apis, Hell., Pod.). Vertigo when stooping, or when rising 
after stooping (Bry.); on every change of position. Abdomen 
tender, distended < by least jar, even of the bed; obliged to walk 
with great care for fear of a jar. Pain in right ileo-coecal region, < 
by slightest touch, even of the bed- cover. The transverse colon 
protrudes like a pad. Skin: of a uniform, smooth, shining scarlet  
redness; dry, hot, burning; imparts a burning sensation to 
examining had; the true Sydenham scarlet fever, where eruption is 
perfectly smooth and truly scarlet. Pressing downwards as if the 
contents of abdomen would issue from the vulva; > standing and 
sitting erect; worse mornings (Lil., Mur., Sep.).
Relations. - Complementary: Calcarea. Belladonna is the acute of 
Calcarea, which is often required to complete a cure. Similar: to, 
Acon., Bry., Cic., Gels., Glon., Hyos., Mel., Op., Stram.
Aggravation. - From touch, motion, noise, draught of air, looking 
at bright, shining objects (Lys., Stram.); after 3 p. m.; night, after 
midnight; while drinking; uncovering the head; summer sun; lying 
down.
Amelioration. - Rest; standing or sitting erect; warm room.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Benzoic Acid.
(C6H5COOH.)
A gouty, rheumatic diathesis engrafted on a gonorrhoeal or 
sypilitic patient. Gouty concretions; arthritis vaga; affects all the 
joints, especially the knee, cracking on motion; nodosities (Berb., 
Lith., Lys.). Urine dark brown, and the urinous odor highly 
intensified. Enuresis nocturna of delicate children; dribbling urine 
of old men with enlarged prostrate; strong characteristic odor; 
excesses of uric acid. Catarrah of bladder after suppressed 
gonorrhea. Diarrhoea of children; white, very offensive, exhausting 
liquid stools, running "right through the diaper" (Pod.); urine 
offensive and of a deep red color. Cough: with expectoration of 
green mucus (Natr. s.); extreme weariness, lassitude. Pains tearing, 
stitching, in large joints of big toe; redness and swelling of joints; 
gout < at night.
Relation. - Similar: to, Cop., Nitr., Fer., Thuja, especially in 
enuresis after Nitr. has failed; Berb., Lith. c., in arthiritic 
complaints. Useful after Colch. fails in gout; after abuse of Cop. in 
suppression of gonorrhoea. Incompatible: wine, which aggravates 
urinary gouty and rheumatic affections.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Berberis Vulgaris.
Barberry (Berberidaceae)
The renal or vesical symptoms predominate. Pain in small of back; 
very sensitive to touch in renal region; < when sitting and lying, 
from jar, from fatigue. Burning and soreness in region of kidneys. 
Numbness, stiffness, lameness with painful pressure in renal and 
lumbar regions. Pale, earthy complexion, with sunken cheeks and 
hollow, blue-encircled eyes. Rheumatic and gouty complaints, with 
diseases of the urinary organs. Colic from gall-stones. Bilious 
colic, followed by jaundice; clay-colored stools; fistula in ano, 
with bilious symptoms and itching of the parts; short cough and 
chest complaints, especially after operations for fistulae (Cal. p., 
Sil.). Stitching, cutting pain from left kidney following course of  
ureter into bladder and urethra (Tab., - r. kidney, Lyc.). Renal 
colic. < left side (Tab. - either side), with urging and strangury. 
(Canth.). Rubbing sensation in kidneys (Med.). Urine: greenish, 
blood-red, with thick, slimy mucus; transparent, reddish or jelly-
like sediment. Movement brings on or increases urinary 
complaints.
Relation. - Similar: to, Canth., Lyc., Sars., Tab., in renal colic. 
Acts well after, Arn., Bry., Kali bi., Rhus, Sulph., in rheumatic 
affections.
Aggravations. - Motion, walking or carriage riding; any sudden 
jarring movement.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Bismuth.
Hydrated Oxide of Bismuth (Bi2O3OH2.)
Solitude is unbearable; desires company, child holds on to its 
mother's hand for company (Kali c., Lil., Lyc.); Anguish; he sits,  
then walks, then lies, never long in one place. Headache returning 
every winter; alternating with, or attended by gastralgia. Face, 
deathly pale, blue rings around the eyes. Toothache > holding cold 
water in mouth. (Bry., Coff., Puls.). Vomiting: of water as soon 
as it reaches the stomach, food retained longer (vomits food and 
water, Ars.); of enormous quantities, at intervals of several days 
when food has filled the stomach; of all fluids as soon as taken; 
and purging, offensive stools (watery stools, Ver.); with convulsive  
gagging and inexpressible pain, after laprotomy (Nux, Staph.). 
Stomach: pressure as from a load in one spot; alternating with 
burning; pain crampy, spasmodic; with irritation, cardialgia and 
pyrosis. Cholera morbus and summer complaint, when vomiting  
predominates; stools foul; papescent, watery, offensive very 
prostrating (Ars., Ver.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Borax.
Biborate of Soda
Dread of downward motion in nearly all complaints. Great 
anxiety from downward motion; when laying the child down on a 
couch or in the crib, cries and clings to the nurse; when rocking, 
dancing, swinging; going down stairs or rapidly down hill; 
horseback riding (compare Sanic.). Children awake suddenly, 
screaming and grasping sides of cradle, without apparent cause 
(Apis, Cina, Stram.). Excessively nervous, easily frightened by the 
slightest noise or an unusual sharp sound, a cough, sneeze, a cry, 
lighting a match, etc. (Asar., Calad.). Hair becomes frowsy and 
tangled; splits, sticks together at eh tips; if these bunches are cut 
off, they form again, cannot be combined (Flour. ac., Lyc., Psor., 
Tub.). Eyelashes: loaded with dry, gummy exudation; agglutinated 
in morning; turn inward and inflame the eye, especially at outer 
canthus; tendency to "wild hairs.". Nostrils crusty, inflamed; tip of 
nose shining red; red noses of young women. Stoppage of right 
nostril, or first right then left with constant blowing of nose (Am. 
c., Lac c., Mag. m.). Aphthae: in the mouth, on the tongue, inside 
of the cheek; easily bleeding when eating or touched; prevents 
child from nursing; with hot mouth, dryness and thirst (Ars.); 
cracked and bleeding tongue (Arum.); salivation, especially during 
dentition. Aphthous sore mouth; is worse from touch; eating salty 
or sour food; of old people, often from plate of teeth (Alumen). 
Child has frequent urination and screams before urine passes (Lyc., 
Sanic., Sars.). Leucorrhoea: profuse, albuminous, starchy, with 
sensation as if warm water were flowing down; for two weeks 
between the catamenia (compare, Bov., Con.). Skin: unhealthy, 
slight injuries suppurate (Calend., Hep., Mer., Sil.).
Relation. - Borax follows: Calc., Psor., Sanic., Sulph. Is followed: 
by, Ars., Bry., Lyc., Phos., Sil. Incompatible: should not be used 
before or after, Acetic acid, vinegar, wine.
Aggravation. - Downward motion; from sudden, slight noises; 
smoking, which may bring on diarrhoea; damp, cold weather; 
before urinating.
Amelioration. - Pressure; holding painful side with hand.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Bovista.
Puffball (Fungi.)
Persons who suffer from tettery eruptions, dry or moist. Adapted to 
old maids; with palpitation. Stammering children (Stram.). 
Discharge from nose and all mucous membranes; very tough,  
stringy, tenacious (Kali bi.). Usually deep impression on finger, 
from using blunt instruments, scissors, knife, etc. Intolerence of 
tight clothing around the waist (Calc., Lach., Sulph.). Sweat in 
axilla, smells like onions. Haemorrhage: after extraction of teeth 
(Ham.); from wounds, epistaxis. Great weakness of joints and 
weariness of hands and feet. Awkwardness, inclined to drop things 
from hand (Apis); objects fall from powerless hands. Menses: flow 
only at night; not in the daytime (Mag. c. - only in the day, ceases 
lying, Cac., Caust., Lil.); every two weeks, dark and clotted; with 
painful bearing down (Sep.). Intolerable itching at tip of coccyx; 
must scratch til parts become raw and sore.
Relations. - Compare: Am. c., Bell., Calc., Mag. s., Sep., in 
menstrual irregularities. Bovista antidotes, effects of local 
applications of tar; suffocation from gas. When Rhus seems 
indicated, but fails to cure, in chronic urticaria.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Bromium.
Bromine. (The Element.)
It acts best, but not exclusively, on persons with light blue eyes,  
flaxen hair, light eyebrows, fair, delicate skin; blonde, red-
cheeked, scrofulous girls. Sensation of cobweb on the face (Bar., 
Bor., Graph.). Fan-like motion of the alae nasi (Ant. t., Lyc.). 
Sailors suffer with asthma "on shore.". Stony, hard, scrofulous or 
tuberculous swelling of glands, especially on lower jaw and throat 
(thyroid, submaxillary, parotid, testes). Diphtheria: where the 
membrane forms in pharynx; beginning in bronchi, trachea or 
larynx, and extending upwards; chest pains running upwards. 
Membranous and diphtheritic croup; much rattling of mucus 
during cough, but no choking (as in Hepar.); sounds loose, but no 
expectoration (Ant. t.). Croupy symptoms with hoarseness during 
whooping cough; gasping for breath. Dyspnoea: cannot inspire 
deep enough; as if breathing through a sponge or the air passages 
were full of smoke or vapor of sulphur; rattling, sawing; voice 
inaudible; danger of suffocation from mucous in larynx (in 
bronchi, Ant. t.). Hypertrophy of heart from gymnastics in growing 
boys (from calisthenics in young girls, Caust.). Physometra; loud 
emission of flatus from the vagina (Lyc.); membranous 
dysmenorrhoea (Lac. c.). Cold sensation in larynx on inspiration 
(Rhus, Sulph.); > after shaving (< after shaving, Carbo an.).
Relations. - Compare: in croup and croupy affections, Chlor., 
Hep., Iod., Spong. Hard goitre cured after Iod. failed. Brom. has 
cured in croup after failure of Iod., Phos., Hep., Spong.; especially 
in relapses after Iod. "The chief distinction between Brom. and Iod. 
is the former cures the blue-eyed and the latter the black-eyed 
patients." - Hering.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Bryonia Alba.
White Bryony, Wild Hop. (Cucurbitaceae.)
Is best adapted to persons of gouty or rheumatic diathesis; prone to 
so- called bilious attacks. Bryonia patients are irritable, inclined to 
be vehement and angry; dark or black hair, dark complexion, firm 
muscular fibre; dry, nervous, slender people (Nux). Pains: 
stitching, tearing, worse at night; < by motion, inspiration,  
coughing; > by absolute rest, and lying on painful side (Ptel., 
Puls. - stitching pain, but < and > are opposite, Kali c.). Excessive  
dryness of mucous membranes of entire body; lips and tongue dry, 
parched, cracked; stool, dry as if burnt; cough, dry, hard, racking, 
with scanty expectoration; urine, dark and scanty; great thirst. 
Vicarious menstruation; nosebleed when menses should appear 
(Phos.); blood spitting, or heamoptysis. Ailments from chagrin, 
mortification, anger (Col., Staph.); violence, with chilliness and 
coldness; after anger chilly, but with head hot and face red (Aur.). 
Complaints: when warm weather sets in, after cold days; from cold 
drinks or ice in hot weather; after taking cold or getting hot in  
summer; from chilling when overheated; kicks the covers off; from 
exposure to draft, cold wind (Acon., Hep.); suppressed discharges, 
of menses, milk or eruption of acute exanthema. One of the chief 
characteristics of Bryonia is, aggravation from any motion, and 
corresponding relief from absolute rest, either mental or 
physical. Desires things immediately which are not to be had, or 
which when offered are refused. Children dislike to be carried, or 
to be raised. Delirium: talks constantly about his business; desire to 
get out of bed and go home (Act., Hyos.). Constant motion on left 
arm and leg (Apoc., Hell.); Patient cannot sit up from nausea and 
faintness. Great thirst for large quantities at long intervals. 
Headache: when stooping, as if brain would burst through 
forehead; from ironing (Sep.); on coughing; in morning after rising 
or when first opening eyes; commencing in the morning, gradually 
increasing until evening; from constipation (Aloe, Colin., Op.). 
Pressure as from stone at pit of the stomach, relieved by eructation 
(Nux, Pul.). Constipation: inactive, no inclination; stool large,  
hard, dark, dry, as if burnt; on going to sea (Plat.). Diarrhoea: 
during a spell of hot weather; bilious, acrid with soreness of anus; 
like dirty water; of undigested food; from cold drinks when 
overheated, from fruit or sour krout; < in morning, on moving, 
even a hand or foot. Mammae heavy, of a stony hardness; pale but 
hard; hot and painful; must support the breasts (Phyt.). Cough: 
dry, spasmodic, with gagging and vomiting (Kali c.); with stitches 
in side of chest; with headache, as if head would fly to pieces; < 
after eating, drinking, entering a warm room, deep inspiration.
Relations. - Complementary: Alumina, Rhus. Similar: to, Bell., 
Hep., for hasty speech and hasty drinking. To Ran. in pleuritic or 
rheumatic pains of chest. To Ptelea, in aching heaviness in hepatic 
region; > lying on right side, greatly < lying on left side; turning to 
the left causes a dragging sensation. After Bryonia; Alum., Kali c., 
Nux, Phos., Rhus, Sulph.
Aggravation. - Motion, exertion, touch; cannot sit up, gets faint 
or sick or both; warmth, warm fold; suppressed discharges of any 
kind.
Amelioration. - Lying, especially on painful side (Ptel., Puls.); 
pressure; rest; cold, eating cold things.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Cactus Grandiflorus.
Night-blooming Cereus. (Cactaceae)
Sanguineous congestions in persons of plethoric habit (Acon.); 
often resulting in haemorrhage; sanguineous apoplexy. Fear of  
death; believes disease incurable (Ars.). Haemorrhage: from nose, 
lungs, stomach, rectum, bladder (Crot., Mill., Phos.). Headache, 
pressing like a heavy weight on vertex ( > by pressure, Meny.); 
climacteric (Glon., Lach.). Headache and neuralgia; congestive, 
periodic, right-sided; severe, throbbing, pulsating pain. Whole 
body feels as if caged, each wire being twisted tighter and tighter. 
Constriction: of throat, chest, heart, bladder, rectum, uterus, 
vagina; often caused or brought on by the slightest contact. 
Oppression of chest, as from a great weight; as if an iron band 
prevented normal motion. Sensation of a cord tightly tied around 
lower part of chest, marking attachment of diaphragm. Heart feels  
as if clasped and unclasped rapidly by an iron hand; as if bound, 
"had no room to beat.". Pains everywhere; darting, springing like 
chain lightening, and ending with a sharp, vise-like grip, only to be 
again renewed. Menstrual flow ceases when lying down (Bov., 
Caust.). Palpitation: day and night; worse when walking and lying 
on left side (Lach.); at approach of menses. Fever paroxysm 
returns at 11 a. m. and 11 p. m.
Relations. - Compare: Acon., Dig., Gels., Kal., Lach., Tab.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
Caladium.
American Arum. (Araceae.)
Very sensitive ot noise; slightest noise startles from sleep (Asar., 
Nux, Taren.). Eructations, frequent, of very little wind, as if 
stomach were full of dry food. Impotence: with mental depression; 
relaxed penis, with sexual desire and excitement (Lyc., Sel.). No 
erection, even after caress; no emission, no orgasm during an 
embrace (Cal., Sel.). Prutius vaginae; induces onanism (Orig., 
Zinc.); during pregnancy; with mucous discharge. Falls asleep 
during evening fever and wakes when it stops. Sweet sweat attracts  
the flies. Mosquito and insect bites burn and itch intensively. 
Aversion to motion; dreads to move (Bry.). Destroys craving for 
tabacco.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Calcarea Arsenica.
Arsenite of Lime
Great mental depression. The slightest emotion causes 
palpitation of heart (Lith. c.). Rush of blood to head and left chest 
(Amyl., Glon.). Epilensies, from valvular diseases of the heart. 
Complaints of drunkards, after abstaining; craving for alcohol 
(Asar., Sul. ac.). Complaints of fleshy women when approaching 
the menopause.
Relations. - Compare: Con., Glon., Lith. c., Puls., Nux. Follows 
well: after Conium, in lymphatic, psoric or tubercular persons.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Calcarea Ostrearum.
Middle layer of Oyster Shell. (Calcium Carbonate)
Leucophlegmatic, blond hair, light complexion, blue eyes, fair 
skin; tendency to obesity in youth. Psoric constitutions; pale, weak, 
timid, easily tired when walking. Disposed to grow fat, corpulent, 
unwieldly. Children with red face, flabby muscles, who sweat 
easily and take cold readily in consequence. Large heads and 
abdomens; fontanelles and sutures open; bones soft, develop very 
slowly. Curvature of bones, especially spine and long bones; 
extremities crooked, deformed; bone irregularly developed. Head 
sweats profusely while sleeping, wetting pillow far around (Sil., 
Sanic.). Profuse perspiration, mostly on back of head and neck, or 
chest and upper part of body (Sil.). Difficult and delayed dentition 
with characteristic head sweats, and open fontanelles. During 
either sickness or convalescence, great longing for eggs; craves 
indigestible things (Alum.); aversion to meat. Acidity of digestive 
tract; sour eructations, sour vomiting, sour stool; sour odor of the 
whole body (Hep., Rheum.). Girls who are fleshy, plethoric, and 
grow too rapidly. Menstruation too early, too profuse, too long 
lasting; with subsequent amenorrhoea and chlorosis with menses 
scanty or suppressed. Women: menses too early, too profuse; feet 
habitually cold and damp, as if they had on cold damp stockings; 
continually cold in bed. The least mental excitement causes profuse 
return of menstrual flow (Sulph., Tub.). Fears she will lose her 
reason or that people will observe her mental confusion (Act.). 
Lung diseases of tall, slender, rapidly growing youth; upper third 
of right lung (Ars. - upper left, Myr., Sulph.); oftener the guide to 
the constitutional remedy than Phosphorus (compare, Tub.). 
Diseases: arising from defective assimilation; imperfect  
ossification; difficulty in learning to walk or stand; children have 
no disposition to walk and will not try; suppressed sweat. Rawness 
of soles of feet from perspiration (Graph., Sanic.); blisters and 
offensive foot sweat. Longing for fresh air (when in a room) which 
inspires, benefits, strengthens (Puls., Sulph.). Coldness: general; 
of single parts (Kali bi.); head, stomach, abdomen, feet and legs; 
aversion to cold open air, "goes right through her:" sensitive to 
cold, damp air; great liability ot take cold (opposite of Sulph.). 
Sweat: of single parts; head, scalp wet, cold; nape of neck; chest; 
axillae, sexual organs; hands, knees; feet (Sep.). Pit of stomach 
swollen like an inverted saucer, and painful to pressure. Uraemic 
or other diseases brought on by standing on cold, damp pavements, 
or working while standing in cold water; modelers or workers in 
cold clay. Feels better in every way when constipated. Stool has to 
be removed mechanically (Aloe., Sanic., Sel., Sep., Sil.). Painless 
hoarseness < in the morning. Desire to be magnetised (Phos.).
Relations. - Complementary: to Bell., which is the acute of Calc. 
Calcarea acts best: before Lyc., Nux., Phos., Sil. It follows: Nit. 
ac., Puls., Sulph. (especially if pupils are dilated); is followed by, 
Kali bi. in nasal catarrh. According to Hahnemann, Calc. must not  
be used before Nit. ac. and Sulph.; may produce unnecessary 
complications. In children it may be often repeated. In aged people 
should not be repeated; especially if the first dose benefited, it will 
usually do harm.
Aggravation. - Cold air; wet weather; cold water; from washing 
(Ant. c.); morning; during full moon.
Amelioration. - Dry weather; lying on painful side (Bry., Puls.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Calcarea Phosphorica.
Phosphate of Lime (Calcium Phosphate)
For persons of anaemic and dark complexioned, dark hair and 
eyes; thin spare subjects, instead of fat. During first and second 
dentition of scrofulous children; diarrhoea and great flatulence. 
Children: emaciated, unable to stand; slow in learning to walk 
(Cal., Sil.); sunken, flabby abdomen. Oozing of bloody fluid from 
naval of infants (of urine, Hyos.). Rachitis; cranial bones thin and 
brittle; fontanelles and sutures remain open so long, or close 
and reopen; delayed or complicated teething. Spine weak, disposed 
to curvatures, especially to the left, unable to support body, neck 
weak, unable to support head (Abrot.). Girls at puberty, tall, 
growing rapidly, tendency of bone to soften or spine to curve 
(Ther.). At puberty; acne in anaemic girls with vertex headache 
and flatulent dyspepsia, > by eating. Ailments from grief, 
disappointed love (Aur., Ign., Phos. ac.). Feels complaints more 
when thinking about them (Helon., Ox. ac.). Involuntary sighing 
(Ign.). Non-union of bones; promotes callous (Symph.). 
Rheumatism of cold weather; getting well in spring and returning 
in autumn. Headache of school-girls (Nat. m., Psor.); diarrhoea. At 
every attempt to eat, colic pains in abdomen. Fistula in ano, 
alternating with chest symptoms (Berb.); lack of animal heat; cold 
sweat and general coldness of body.
Relations. - Complementary: Ruta. Similar: to Carbo an., Cal. 
fluor., Calc., Fluor. ac., Kali phos.; to Psor., in debility remaining 
after acute diseases; to Sil., but sweat of head is wanting. Acts 
best: before Iod., Psor., Sanic., Sulph.; after Ars., Iod., Tub.
Aggravation. - Exposure to damp, cold, changeable weather; east 
winds; melting snow; mental exertion.
Amelioration. - In summer; warm, dry atmosphere.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Calendula.
Marigold (Compositae)
Traumatic affections: to secure union by first intention and prevent 
suppuration. In all cases of loss of soft parts when union cannot be 
effected by means of adhesive plaster. External wounds with or 
without loss of substance; torn and jagged looking woulds; post-
surgical operation; to promote healthy granulation and prevent 
excessive suppuration and disfiguring scars. Traumatic and 
idiopathic neuroma (Cepa); neuritis from lacerated wounds 
(Hyper.); exhausted from loss of blood and excessive pain. Rupture 
of muscles or tendons; lacerations during labor; wounds 
penetrating articulations with loss of synovial fluids. Wounds: with 
sudden pain during febrile heat; constitutional tendency to 
erysipelas (Psor.); old, neglected, offensive; threatening gangrene 
(Sal. ac.). Ulcers: irritable, inflamed, sloughing, varicose; painful  
as if beaten (Arn.); excessive secretion of pus. Calendula is almost 
specific for clean, surgical cuts or lacerated wounds, to prevent 
excessive suppuration.
Relations. - Complementary: Hep., Sal. ac. Similar: to, Hyper. in 
injuries to parts rich in sentient nerves where pain is excessive and 
out of all proportion to injury. Similar: to, Arn. in traumatism 
without laceration of soft tissue. Symp., Calc. p., for non-union of 
bones. Rhus, Ruta, strains or injuries of single muscles. Sal. ac. 
prevents excessive suppuration; gangrene. Sulph. ac. in painful, 
gangrenous wounds; said to destroy septic germs. Acts well in 
potency as in tincture, applied locally and my be administered 
internally at the same time.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Camphora.
Camphor (Lauraccae)
Pain better while thinking of it (Hell. - worse, Cal. p., Helon., Ox. 
ac.). Persons physically and mentally weak and irritable. 
Exceedingly sensitive to cold air (Hep., Kali m., Psor.). Bad effects 
of shock from injury; surface of body cold, face pale, blue lips 
livid; profound prostration. Surface cold to the touch yet cannot 
bear to be covered; throws off all coverings (Med., Sec.). Entire 
body painfully sensitive to slightest touch. Tongue cold, flabby, 
trembling. Sudden attacks of vomiting and diarrhoea; nose cold 
and pointed; anxious and restless; skin and breath cold (Ver., Jatr.). 
In first stages of cholera morbus and Asiatic cholera; severe, long- 
lasting chill (Ver.). Great coldness of the surface with sudden and 
complete prostration of the vital force; often a remedy in 
congestive chill; pernicious intermittent (Ver.); pulse weak, 
externally small, scarcely perceptible. Measles and scarlatina when 
eruption does not appear; with pale or cold blue, hippocratic face; 
child will not be covered (Sec.). All sequelae of measles.
Relations. - Camphor antidoes nearly every vegetable medicine; 
also tabacco, fruits containing prussic acid, poisonous mushrooms; 
should not be allowed in the sick room in its crude form; Compare: 
Carbo veg., Opium, Verat., Sec.
Amelioration. - When thinking of existing complaint; warm air; 
drinking cold water. Note for thought. - All our progress as a 
school depends on the right view of the symptoms obtained by 
proving with Camphor and Opium. - Hering.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cannabis Indica.
Indian Hemp. (Urticaccae)
Very forgetful: forgets his last words and ideas; begins a 
sentence, forgets what he intends to speak; inability to recall any 
thought or event on account of other thoughts crowding the brain 
(Anac., Lac. c.). Constantly theorizing. Laughs immoderately at 
every trifling word spoken to him. Full of fun and mischief, then 
perhaps moaning and crying. Great apprehension of approaching 
death. Delirium tremens; excessive loquacity; exaggeration of time 
and distance. Time seems too long (Arg. n.); a few seconds seem 
ages. Distance seems immense; a few rods seems miles. Sensation 
as it the cavarium was opening and shutting (Act.). Sensation of 
swelling in the perineum or near the anus, as if sitting on a ball 
(with great quantities of ropy mucus in urine, Cinch.).
Relation. - Compare: Bell., Hyos;, Stram.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cannabis Sativa.
Hemp. (Urticaccae)
Sensation as of drops of water falling on or from single parts; on 
the head, form the anus, stomach, heart. Obstinate constipation, 
causing retention of the urine; constriction of anus. Contraction of 
fingers after a sprain. Dislocation of patelly on going up stairs. 
Dyspnoea or asthma, where the patient can only breathe by 
standing up. Choking in swallowing, things go down "the wrong 
way" (Anac.). Acute, inflammatory stage of gonorrhoea (second 
stages, burning after urination, discharge thick, yellow, pus-like, 
Cub.). Urethra very sensitive to touch or pressure; cannot walk 
with legs close together, it hurts the urethra. Pain extending from 
orifice of urethra backward, burning-biting, posteriorly more 
sticking, while urinating. Tearing pains along urethra in a zigzag 
direction.
Relations. - Similar: to, Canth., Caps., Gels., Petros., in early 
stages of specific urethritis.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cantharides.
Spanish Flies (Cantharideae)
Oversensitiveness of all parts. Haemorrhages from nose, mouth, 
intestines, genital and urinary organs. Pain; raw, sore, burning in 
every part of the body, internally and externally; with extreme 
weakness. Disgust for everything; drink, food, tabacco. Drinking 
even small quantities of water increases pain in the bladder. 
Constant urging to urinate, passing but a few drops at the time, 
which is mixed with blood (sudden desire to urinate and intense 
itching in urethra, Petros.). Intolerable urging, before, during and 
after urination; violent pains in bladder. Burning, cutting pains in 
urethra during micturition; violent tenesmus and strangury. Stool: 
passage of white or pale, red, tough mucus, like scrapings from the 
intestines, with streaks of blood (Carb. an., Colch.). Bloody, 
nocturnal emission (Led., Mer., Petr.). Sexual desire: increased 
both sexes; preventing sleep; violent priapism, with excessive pain 
(Pic. ac.). Tenacious mucus in the air passages (Bov., Kali bi.); 
compare Cantharis if vesical symptoms correspond. Skin: vesicular 
erysipelas; vesicles all over body which are sore and suppurating. 
Erythema from exposure to sun's rays (sunburn). The burning pain 
and intolerable urging to urinate, is the red strand of Cantharis in 
all inflammatory affections.
Relations. - Similar: to, Apis, Ars., Equis., Mer. Burns before 
blisters form and when they have formed. In the skin be unbroken, 
apply an alcoholic solution of any potency and cover with cotton; 
this will promptly relieve pain and often prevent vesication. If the 
skin be broken use in boiled or distilled water, and in each case 
give potency internally.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Capsicum.
Cayenne Pepper (Solanaccae)
Persons with light hair, blue eyes, nervous but stout and plethoric 
habit. Phlegmatic diathesis; lack of reactive force, especially with 
fat people, easily exhausted; indolent, dreads any kind of exercise; 
persons inclined to be jovial, yet angry at trifles. Children; dread 
open air; always chilly; refractory, clumsy, fat, dirty, and 
disinclined to work or think. Desires to be let alone; wants to lie 
down and sleep; Homesickness (of indolent, melancholic), with 
red cheeks and sleeplessness. Constriction: in fauces; throat; nares; 
chest; bladder; urethra; rectum. Burning and smarting sensation, 
as from cayenne pepper, in throat and other parts, not > heat. 
Tonsillitis: with burning, smarting pain; intense soreness; 
constriction of throat with burning; inflamed, dark red, swollen. 
The burning spasmodic constriction and other pains, worse 
between acts of deglutition (Ign.). Painful swelling behind ear 
(mastoid), extremely sore and sensitive to touch. Every stool is 
followed by thirst and every drink by shuddering. As the coldness 
of the body increases, so also does the ill-humor. Nervous, 
spasmodic cough; in sudden paroxysms; as if head would fly to 
pieces. With every explosive cough (and at no other time) there 
escapes a volume of pungent, fetid air. Pain in distant parts on 
coughing (bladder, knees, legs, ears).
Relations. - Compare: Apis, Bell., Bry., Calad., Puls. Cina follows 
well in intermittent fever. The constricting, burning, smarting pains 
differentiate from Apis and Belladonna.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Carbo Animalis.
Animal Charcoal
Headache: as if a tornado in head; as if head had been blown to 
pieces; has to sit up at night and hold it together. Diseases of 
elderly persons with marked venous plethora, blue cheeks, blue 
lips, and great debility. Circulation feeble, stagnated, and vital heat 
sinks to a minimum; cyanosis (Ant. t., Carbo v.). Glands: 
indurated, swollen, painful; in neck, axillae, groin, mammae; pains 
lancinating, cutting, burning (Con.). Benign suppurations change 
into ichorous or malignant conditions. Easily strained from lifting, 
even small weights; straining and overlifting easily produce great 
debility; ankles turn when walking. Joints weak; easily sprained by 
slight exertion (Led.). Aversion to open, dry, cold air. After 
appearance of menses so weak she can hardly speak (Alum., Coc.); 
menses flow only in the morning. Hearing confused; cannot tell 
from what direction a sound comes. A stitching pain remains in 
chest after recovery from pleurisy (Ran. b.); Menstruation, 
leucorrhoea, diarrhoea are all exhausting (Ars. - are all offensive, 
Psor.).
Relations. - Complementary: Calc. phos. Similar: to, Bad., Brom., 
Carbo v., Phos., Sep., Sulph. Carbo animalis is often useful after 
bad effects from spoiled fish and decayed vegetables (Carbo v., 
Cepa).
Aggravation. - After shaving ( > after, Brom.); slightest touch, 
after midnight.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Carbo Vegetabilis.
Vegetable Charcoal
For the bad effects of exhausting diseases, whether in young or old 
(Cinch., Phos., Psor.); cachetic persons whose vitality has become 
weakened or exhausted. Persons who have never fully recovered 
from the exhausting effects of some previous illness; asthma dates 
from measles or pertusis of childhood; indigestion from a drunken 
debauch; bad effects of a long ago injury; has never recovered 
from effects of typhoid (Psor.). Ailments: from quinine, especially 
suppressed intermittents; abuse of mercury, salt, salt meats; spoiled 
fish, meats, or fats; from getting overheated (Ant. c.). Bad effects 
from loss of vital fluids (Caust.); haemorrhage from any broken 
down condition of mucous membranes (Cinch., Phos.). Weakness 
of memory and slowness of thought. Epistaxis in daily attacks, for 
weeks, worse from exertion; face pale before as well as after a 
haemorrhage. Haemorrhage from any mucous outlet; in systems 
broken down, debilitated; blood oozes from weakened tissues; vital 
force exhausted. Hippocratic face; very pale, grayish-yellow, 
greenish, cold with cold sweat; after haemorrhage. Looseness of 
teeth, easily-bleeding gums. Patients crave things that make them 
sick; old topers crave whiskey or brandy; want clothing loose 
around abdomen. Weak digestion; simplest food disagrees; 
excessive accumulation of gas in stomach and intestines < lying 
down; after eating or drinking, sensation as if stomach would 
burst; effects of a debauch, late suppers, rich food. Eructations give 
temporary relief. Diseases of the venous system predominate 
(Sulph.); symptoms of imperfect oxidation (Arg. nit.). Deficient 
capillary circulation causes blueness of skin and coldness of 
extremities; vital powers nearly exhausted; desire to be constantly 
fanned. Hoarseness: < evenings; damp evening air; warm, wet 
weather; fails when exerted (< morning, Caust.). Awakens often 
from cold limbs and suffers from cold knees at night (Apis). 
Frequent, involuntary, cadaverous-smelling stools, followed by 
burning; soft stool voided with difficulty (Alum.). In the last stages 
of disease, with copious cold sweat, cold breath, cold tongue,  
voice lost, this remedy may save a life.
Relations. - Complementary: Kali carb. Want of susceptabilty to 
well-selected remedies (Opium, Val.). Compare: Cinch., Plumb., in 
neglected pneumonia, especially in "old toppers;" Ant. t. in 
threatened paralysis from inability to expectorate loosened mucus. 
Opium: with lack of reaction after well-selected remedies fail to 
permanently improve (Val.). Phos. in easily bleeding ulcers. Puls., 
bad effects from fat food and pastry. Sulph., acrid-smelling 
menstrual flow and erysipelas of mammae.
Aggravation. - From butter, pork, fat food; abuse of quinine, bark 
and mercury; from singing or reading aloud; in warm, damp 
weather.
Amelioration. - From eructation; being fanned.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Carbolic Acid.
Glacial Carbolic Acid
The potencies are made with alcohol (an exception to the rule of 
preparing acids). Pains are terrible; come suddenly, last a short 
time, disappear suddenly (Bell., Mag. p.). Profound prostration, 
collapse; surface pale and bathed in cold sweat (Camph., Carbo v., 
Ver.). Physical exertion, even much walking, brings on abscess in 
some part, but generally in the right ear. - R. T. Cooper. Dull, 
heavy, frontal headache, as if a rubber band were stretched tightly  
over the forehead, from temple to temple (Gels., Plat., Sulph.). 
When burns tend to ulceration and ichorous discharge. Putrid 
discharges from mouth, nose, throat, nostrils, rectum and vagina 
(Anthr., Psor., Pyr.). Malignant scarlatina and variola (Am. c.). 
Lacerated wounds with blunt instruments; bones bare, crushed; 
much sloughing of soft parts (Calend.). Longing for whiskey and 
tobacco (Asar., Carbo. v.). Vomiting: of drunkards, in pregnancy, 
sea-sickness, cancer; of dark, olive-green fluid (Pyr.). Dysentery: 
fluid mucus, like scarpings of mucus membranes, and great 
tenesmus (Canth.); diarrhoea, stool thin, involuntary, black, of an 
intolerable odor. Constipation, with horrible offensive breath 
(Op., Psor.). Leucorrhoea: acid, copious, fetid, green.
Relations. - Compare: Ars., Kreos, in burns; ulcers with unhealthy, 
offensive discharges, Gels., Mer., Sulph. Carbolic acid is antidoted 
by dilute cider vinegar, either externally or internally, when acid 
has been swallowed accidentally, or taken for suicidal purposes.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Caulophyllum.
Blue Cohosh (Berberidaceae)
Especially suited to women; ailments during pregnancy, 
parturition, lactation. Rheumatism of women, especially of small 
joints (Act. s.); errative pains changing place every few minutes 
(Puls.); painful stiffness of affected joints. Pains are intermittent, 
paroxysmal, spasmodic. Chorea, hysteria or epilepsy at puberty, 
during establishment of menstrual function (Actaea). Leucorrhoea: 
acrid, exhausting; upper eyelids heavy, has to raise them with 
fingers (Gels.); with "moth spots" on forehead (Sep.); in little girls 
(Calc.); preventing pregnancy. Habitual abortion from uterine 
debility (Alet. - from anaemia with profound melancholy, Helon.); 
Spasmodic rigid os, delays labor; needle-like pricking pains in 
cervix. Labor pains short, irregular, spasmodic; tormenting, useless 
pains in beginning of labor (Act.); no progress made. Will correct 
deranged vitality and produce efficient pains, if the symptoms 
agree. Haemorrhage, after hasty labor; want of tonicity; passive, 
after abortion (Sec., Thlaspi). After pains: after long exhausting 
labor; spasmodic, across lower abdomen; extend into groins (in the 
shins, Carbo v., Coc.). Lochia protracted; great atony; passive, 
oozing for days from relaxed vessels (Sec.).
Relations. - Simiar: to, Act., Bell., Lil., Puls., Sec., Thlas., Vib. 
Similar: to, labor pains of Puls., but mental condition opposite. 
Similar: to, Sep., "moth patches" and reflex symptoms from uterine 
irregularities.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Causticum.
Hahnemann's (Tinctura acris sine Kali)
Adapted to persons with dark hair and rigid fibre; weakly, psoric, 
with excessively yellow, sallow complexion; subject to affections of 
respiratory and urinary tracts. Children with dark hair and eyes, 
delicate, sensitive, skin prone to intertigo during dentition (Lyc.), 
or convulsions with eruption of teeth (Stan.). Disturbed functional 
activity of brain and spinal cord, from exhausting disease or severe 
mental shock, resulting in paralysis. Rawness or soreness: of 
scalp, throat, respiratory tract, rectum, anus, urethra, vagina, uterus 
(as if bruised, Arn.; as if sprained, Rhus). Melancholy mood: sad, 
hopeless; from care, grief, sorrow; with weeping, "the least thing 
makes the child cry.". Intense sympathy for sufferings of others. 
Ailments: from long-lasting grief and sorrow (Phos. ac.); from loss 
of sleep, night watching (Coc., Ign.); from sudden emotions, fear, 
fright, joy (Coff., Gels.); from anger or vexation; from suppressed 
eruptions. Children slow in learning to walk (Cal. p.). Unsteady 
walking and easy falling of little children. Constipation: frequent, 
ineffectual desire (Nux); stool passes better when person is  
standing; impeded by haemorrhoids; tough and shining, like 
grease; in children and nocturnal enuresis. Urine involuntary: when 
coughing, sneezing, blowing the nose (Puls., Squil., Ver.). Cough: 
with rawness and soreness in chest; with inability to expectorate, 
sputa must be swallowed (Arn., Kali c.); relieved by swallow of 
cold water; on expiration (Acon.); with pain in hips; remaining 
after pertusis; with expectoration chiefly at night. Hoarseness with 
rawness, and aphonia < in the morning (< in the evening, Carbo v., 
Phos.). At night, unable to get an easy position or lie still a moment 
(Eup., Rhus). Must move constantly, but motion does not relieve. 
Cannot cover too warmly, but warmth does not >. Faint-like 
sinking of strength; weakness and trembling. Xixeixwa, especially 
burns, scalds, freshen up, become sore again; old injuries re-open; 
patients say "they never have been well since that burn.". Menses: 
too early; too feeble; only during the day; cease on lying down. 
Paralysis: of single parts; vocal organs, tongue, eyelids, face, 
extremities, bladder; generally, of right side; from exposure to cold 
wind or draft; after typhoid, typhus or diphtheria; gradually 
appearing. Drooping of upper eyelids; cannot keep them open 
(Caul., Gels., Graph. - of both lids, Sep.). Rheumatic affections, 
with contraction of the flexors and stiffness of the joints; tension 
and shortening of muscles (Am. m., Cimex, Guaiac., Nat. mur.). 
Warts: large, jagged, often pedunculated; bleeding easily; exuding 
moisture; small, all over the body; on eyelids, face; on the nose. 
Patient improves for a time, then comes to a "standstill" (Psor, 
Sulph.).
Relations. - Complementary: Carbo veg., Petros. Incompatible: 
Phos. Must not be used before or after Phos., always disagrees; the 
Acids; Coffea. Compare: Arn., must swallo mucus; Gels., Graph., 
Sep. in ptosis; hoarseness, Rumex and Carbo v. when < changes to 
evening; Sulph. in chronic aphonia. Causticum antidotes paralysis 
from lead poisoning (bad effects of holding type in mouth of 
compositors). and abuse of Merc. or Sulph. in scabies. It affects the 
right side most prominently.
Aggravation. - In clear, fine weather; coming from the air into a 
warm room (Bry.); cold air, especially draft of cold air; on 
becoming cold; from getting wet or bathing.
Amelioration. - In damp, wet weather; warm air.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Chamomilla.
Matricaria Chambilla. (Compositae)
Persons, especially children, with light brown hair, nervous, 
excitable temperament; oversensitive from use or abuse of coffee 
or narcotics. Children, new-born and during period of dentition. 
Peevish, irritable, oversensitive to pain, driven to despair (Coff.); 
snappish, cannot return a civil answer. Child exceedingly irritable,  
fretful; quiet only when carried; impatient, wants this or that and 
becomes angry when refused, or when offered, petulantly rejects it 
(Bry., Cina, Kreos.); "too ugly to live;" cross, spiteful. Piteous 
moaning of child because he cannot have what he wants; whining 
restlessness. Patient cannot endure any one near him; is cross, 
cannot bear to be spoken to (Sil.); averse to talking, answers 
peevishly. Complaints from anger, especially chill and fever. Pain: 
seems unendurable, drives to despair; < by heat; < evening before 
midnight; with heat, thirst and fainting; with numbness of affected  
part; eructations <. One cheek red and hot, the other pale and cold. 
Oversensitive to open air; great aversion to wind, especially about 
ears. Toothache if anything warm is taken into the mouth (Bis., 
Bry., Coff.); on entering a warm room; in bed; from coffee; during 
menses or pregnancy. Labor pains; spasmodic, distressing, wants 
to get away from them; tearing down the legs; press upward. 
Diarrhoea: from cold, anger or chagrin; during dentition; after 
tabacco; in child-bed; from downward motion (Bor., Sanic.). Stool 
green, watery, corroding, like chopped eggs and spinach; hot, very 
offensive, like rotten eggs. Nipples inflamed, tender to touch 
(Helon., Phyt.); infant's breasts tender to touch. Milk runs out in 
nursing women (runs out after weaning, Con.). Convulsions of 
children from nursing, after a fit of anger in mother (Nux - after 
fright in mother, Op.). Violent rheumatic pains drive him out of 
bed at night, compel him to walk about (Rhus). Sleepy, but cannot 
sleep (Bell., Caust., Op.). Burning of soles at night, puts feet out of 
bed (Puls., Med., Sulph.).
Relations. - Complementary: Bell. in diseases of children, cranial 
nerves; Cham., abdominal nerves. In cases spoiled by the use of 
opium or morphine in complaints of children. Compare: Bell., 
Bor., Bry., Coff., Puls., Sulph. Mental calmness contra-indicates 
Chamomilla.
Aggravation. - By heat; anger; evening, before midnight; open air; 
in the wind; eructations.
Amelioration. - From being carried; fasting; warm, wet weather.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Chelidonium Majus.
Celandine (Papaveraceae)
Persons of light complexion, blondes; thin, spare, irritable; subject 
to hepatic, gastric and abdominal complaints (Pod.); every age, sex 
and temperament. Constant pain under the lower and inner 
angle of right scapula (Kali c., Mer. - under the left, Chenop. g., 
Sang.). Ailments: brought on or renewed by change of weather 
(Mer.); all lessen after dinner. Tongue coated thickly yellow, with 
red edges, showing imprint of teeth (Pod. - large, flabby, with 
imprint of teeth, Mer.). Desire for very hot drinks, unless almost 
boiling stomach will not retain them (Ars., Casc.). Periodic orbital 
neuralgia (right side), with excessive lachrymation; tears fairly  
gush out (Rhus). Constipation: stool, hard, round balls like sheep's 
dung (Op., Plumb.); alternate constipation and diarrhoea. 
Diarrhoea: at night; slimy, ligh-gray; bright-yellowish; brown or 
white, watery, pasty; involuntary. Face, forehead, nose, cheeks, 
remarkably yellow. Yellow-gray color of the skin; wilted skin; of 
the palms of hands (Sep.). Hepatic diseases; jaundice, pain in right 
shoulder. Pneumonia of right lung, liver complications (Mer.). 
Spasmodic cough; small lumps of mucus fly from mouth when 
coughing (Bad., Kali c.). Affects right side most; right eye, right 
lung, right hypochondrium and abdomen, right hip and leg; right 
foot cold as ice, left natural (Lyc.). Old, putrid, spreading ulcers, 
with a history of liver disease, or of a tubercular diathesis. Gall-
stones, with pain under the right shoulder-blade (terrible attacks of 
gall-stone colic, Card. m.).
Relations. - Chel. antidotes the abuse of Bry., especially in hepatic 
complaints. Compare: Acon., Bry., Lyc., Mer., Nux, Sang., Sep., 
Sulph. Ars., Lyc., Sulph. follow well, and will often be required to 
complete the cure.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cicuta Virosa.
Water Hemlock (Umbelliferae)
Women subject to epileptic and choreic convulsions; spasms of 
teething children, or from worms. Convulsions: violent, with 
frightful distortions of limbs and whole body; with loss of 
consciousness; opisthotonos; renewed from slightest touch, noise 
or jar. Puerperal convulsions: frequent suspension of breathing for 
a few moments, as if dead; upper part of the body most affected; 
continue after delivery. Epilepsy: with swelling of the stomach as 
from violent spasms of the diaphragm; screaming; red or bluish 
face; lockjaw, loss of consciousness and distortion of limbs; 
frequent during the night; recurring, first at short, then at long 
intervals. When reading, the letters seem to turn, go up or down or 
disappear (Coc.). During dentition, grinding of teeth or gums; 
compression of the jaws as in lockjaw. Abnormal appetite for 
chalk and indigestible things; for coal or charcoal; child eats them 
with apparent relish (Alum., Psor.). Suffer violent shocks through 
head, stomach, arms, legs, which cause jerkings of the parts; head 
hot. Injurious chronic effects from concussions of the brain and 
spine, especially spasms; trismus and tetanus from getting splinters 
into flesh (Hyper.). Pustules which run together, forming thick, 
yellow scabs, on head and face. Sycosis menti. Eczema: no itching; 
exudation forms into a hard lemon-colored crust. Brain disease 
from suppressed eruptions.
Relations. - Compare: Hydr. ac., Hyper., Nux, Strych.
Aggravation. - From tabacco smoke (Ign.); touch.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cina.
Worm Seed. (Compositae)
Adapted to children with dark hair, very cross, irritable, ill-
humored, want to be carried, but carrying gives no relief; does not 
want to be touched; cannot bear you to come hear it; averse to 
caresses; desires many things; but rejects everything offered 
(compare, Ant. t., Bry., Cham., Staph.). Constantly digging and 
boring at the nose; picks the nose all the time; itching of nose; rubs 
nose on pillow, or on shoulder of nurse (Mar. v.). Children, 
suffering from worms; pitiful weeping when awake, starts and 
screams during sleep; grinding of teeth (Cic., Sulph.); ascarides 
(Mar. v.). Face is pale; sickly white and bluish appearance around 
mouth; sickly, with dark rings under the eyes; one cheek red, the 
other pale (Cham.). Canine hunger: hungry soon after a full meal; 
craving for sweets and different things; refuses mother's milk. 
Urine; turbid when passed, turns milky and semi-solid after 
standing; white and turbid; involuntary. Cough: dry with sneezing; 
spasmodic, gagging in the morning; periodic, returning spring and 
fall. Child is afraid to speak or move for fear of bringing on a 
paroxysm of coughing (Bry.).
Relations. - Compare: Ant. c., Ant. t., Bry., Cham., Kreos., Sil., 
Staph., in irritability of children. In pertusis, after Drosera has 
relieved the severe symptoms. Has cured aphonia from exposure 
when Acon., Phos. and Spong. had failed. Is frequently to be 
thought of, in children, as an epidemic remedy, when adults 
require other drugs. Santonie sometimes cures in worm affections 
when Cina seems indicated, but fails (Mar. v., Spig.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cinchona (China).
Peruvian Bark (Rubiaceae)
For stout, swarthy persons; for systems, once robust, which have 
become debilitated, "broken down" from exhausting discharges 
(Carbo v.). Apathetic, indifferent, taciturn (Phos. ac.); despondent, 
gloomy, has no desire to live, but lacks courage to commit suicide. 
Ailments: from loss of vital fluids, especially haemorrhages, 
excessive lactation, diarrhoea, suppuration (Chin. s.); of malarial 
origin, with marked periodicity; return every other day. After 
climacteric with profuse haemorrhages; acute diseases often result 
in dropsy. Pains: drawing or tearing; in every joint, all the bones. 
Peristeum, as if strainted, sore all over; obliged to move limbs 
frequently, as motion gives relief; renewed by contact, and then 
gradually increase to a great height. Headache: as if the skull  
would burst; intense throbbing of head and carotids, face flushed; 
from occiput over whole head; < sitting or lying, must stand or 
walk; after haemorrhage or sexual excesses. Face pale, 
hippocratic; eyes sunken and surrounded by blue margins; pale, 
sickly expression as after excesses; toothache while nursing the 
child. Excessive flatulence of stomach and bowels; fermentation, 
borborygmus, belching gives no relief (belching relieves, Carbo 
v.); < after eating fruit (Puls.). Colic: at a certain hour each day; 
periodical, form gall-stones (Card.m.); worse at night and after 
eating; better bending double (Coloc.). Great debility, trembling, 
aversion to exercise; sensitive to touch, to pain, to drafts of air; 
entire nervous system extremely sensitive. Unrefreshing sleep or 
constant sopor; < after 3 a. m.; wakens early. Haemorrhages: of 
mouth, nose, bowels or uterus; long continued; longing for sour 
things. Disposition to haemorrhage from every orifice of the body, 
with ringing in ears, fainting, loss of sight, general coldness, 
sometimes convulsions (Fer., Phos.). Pains are < by slightest 
touch, but > by hard presure (Caps., Plumb.). One hand icy cold, 
the other warm (Dig., Ipec., Puls.). Intermittent fever: paroxysm 
anticipates from two to three hours each attack (Chin. s.); returns 
every seven or fourteen days; never at night; sweats profusely all 
over on being covered, or during sleep (Con.).
Relations. - Complementary: Ferrum. Follows well: Cal. p. in 
hydrocephaloid. Compare: Chin. s. in intermittent fever, 
anticipating type. Incompatible: after, Dig., Sel. Is useful in bad 
effects from excessive tea drinking or abuse of chamomile tea, 
when haemorrhage results.
Aggravation. - From slightest touch; draft of air; every other day; 
mental emotions; loss of vital fluids.
Amelioration. - Hard pressure; bending double.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Coca.
For persons who are wearing out under the physical and mental 
strain of a busy life; who suffer from exhausted nerves and brains 
(compare, Fluor. ac.). Melancholy, from nervous exhaustion; 
bashful, timid, ill at ease in society. Sad, irritable; delights in 
solitude and obscurity. Longing for alcoholic liquors and tabacco; 
for the accustomed stimulants. Want of breath: in those engaged in 
athletic sports; shortness of breath, in old people; in those who use 
tabacco and whiskey to excess. Haemoptysis, with oppression of 
chest and dyspnoea. Sleepy, but can find no rest anywhere. Violent 
palpitation: from incarcerated flatus (Arg. n., Nux); from 
overexertion; from heart strain (Arn., Bor., Caust.). Bad effects: 
from mountain climbing or ballooning (Ars.); of stimulants, 
alcohol, tabacco. Prevents caries of teeth.
Relations. - Compare: patient desires light and company, Stram.; 
desires darkness and solitude, Coca. Was first used as a tobacco 
antidote.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cocculus.
Cocculus Indicus (Menispermaccae)
For women and children with light hair and eyes, who suffer 
severely during menstruation and pregnancy; unmarried and 
childless women. Adapted to book-worms; sensitive, romantic 
girls with irregular menstruation; rakes, onanists and persons 
debilitated by sexual excesses. Nausea or vomiting from riding in 
carriage, boat or railroad car (Arn., Nux m.), or even looking at  
at a boat in motion; sea- sickness; car-sickness. Headache: in nape 
and occiput; extending to the spine; as if tightly bound by a cord; 
with nausea, as if at sea; at each menstrual period; < lying on back 
of head. Sick-headache from carriage, boat or train riding. Diseases 
peculiar to drunkards. Loss of appetite, with metallic taste (Mer.). 
Time passes too quickly (too slowly, Arg. n., Can. I.). Great 
lassitude of the whole body; it requires exertion to stand firmly; 
feels too weak to talk loudly. Bad effects: from loss of sleep, 
mental excitement and nigh watching; feel weak if they lose but 
one hour's sleep; convulsions after loss of sleep; of anger and grief. 
Trembling of arms and legs; from excitement, exertion or pain. 
Vertigo, as if intoxicated upon rising in bed; or by motion of the 
carriage (Bry.). Sensation: in abdomen of cutting and rubbing on 
every movement, as of sharp stones; of hollowness in head and 
other parts (Ign.). During the effort to menstruate she is so weak 
she is scarcely able to stand from weakness of lower limbs (Alum., 
Carbo an.); after each period haemorrhoids. Leucorrhoea in place 
of menses, or between periods (Iod., Xan.); like the washings of 
meat; like serum, ichorous, bloody; during pregnancy. Cannot bear 
contradiction; easily offended; every trifle makes him angry; 
speaks hastily (Anac.). When fever assumes a slow, "sneaking," 
nervous form, with vertigo; with disposition to anger.
Relations. - Compare: Ign., Nux, in chorea and paralytic 
symptoms; Ant. t. in sweat of affected parts. Has cured umbilical 
hernia with obstinate constipation after Nux failed.
Aggravation. - Eating, drinking, sleeping, smoking, talking, 
carriage riding, motion or swing of ship; rising up during 
pregnancy.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Coffee Cruda.
Coffee (Rubiaceae)
Tall, lean, stooping persons, dark complexion, sanguine choleric 
temperament. Oversensitiveness; all the senses more acute, sight, 
hearing, smell, taste, touch (Bell., Cham., Opium). Unusual 
activity of mind and body. Full of ideas; quick to act, no sleep on 
this account. Ailments: the bad effects of sudden emotions or 
pleasurable surprises (Caust. - exciting or bad news, Gels.); 
weeping from delight; alternate laughing and weeping. Pains are 
felt intensely; seem almost insupportable, driving patient to despair 
(Acon., Cham.); tossing about in anguish. Sleepless, wide-awake 
condition; impossible to close the eyes; physical excitement 
through mental exaltation. (Compare, Senecio, for sleeplessness 
form prolapsus, uterine irritation, during climacteric.). Headache: 
from over-mental exertion, thinking, talking; one-sided, as from a 
nail driven into the brain (Ign., Nux); as if brain were torn or 
dashed to pieces; worse in open air. Hasty eating and drinking 
(Bell., Hep.). Toothache: intermittent, jerking, relieved by holding 
ice-water in the mouth, but returns when water becomes warm 
(Bis., Bry., Puls., Caust., Sep., Nat. s.).
Relations. - Compare: Acon., Cham., Ign., Sulph. Incompatible: 
Canth., Caust., Coc., Ign.
Aggravation. - Sudden mental emotion; excessive joy; cold, open 
air; narcotic medicines.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Colchicum Autumnale.
Meadow Saffron. (Liliaceae)
Adapted to the rheumatic, gouty diathesis; persons of robust 
vigorous constitution; diseases of old people. External impressions, 
light, noise, strong odors, contact, bad manners, make him almost 
beside himself (Nux); his sufferings seem intolerable. Ailments: 
from grief or misdeeds of others (Staph.). Pains are drawing, 
tearing, pressing; light or superficial during warm weather; affect 
the bones and deeper tissues, when air is cold; pains go from left to 
right (Lach.). Smell painfully acute; nausea and faintness from 
the odor of cooking food, especially fish, eggs or fat meat (Ars., 
Sep.); bad effects from night watching (Coc.). Aversion to food; 
loathing even the sight of still more the smell of it. The abdomen is 
immensely distended with gas, feeling as if it would burst. 
Burning, or icy coldness in stomach and abdomen. Autumnal 
dysentery, discharges from bowels contain white shreddy particles 
in large quantities; white mucus; "scrapings of intestines" (Canth., 
Carb. ac.). Urine: dark, scanty or suppressed; in drops, with white 
sediment; bloody, brown, black, inky; contains clots of putrid 
decomposed blood, albumin, sugar. Affected parts very sensitive to 
contact and motion. Arthiritic pains in joints; patient scremas with 
pain on touching a joint or stubbing a toe.
Relations. - Compare: Bry. in rheumatic gout with serous 
effusions; in rheumatism in warm weather. Often cures in dropsy 
after Apis and Ars. fail.
Aggravation. - Mental emotion or exhaustion; effects of hard 
study; odor of cooking food. Motion: if the patient lies perfectly 
still, the disposition to vomit is less urgent. Every motion renew it 
(Bry.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Collinsonia Canadensis.
Stone Root. (Labiatae)
Pelvic and portal congestion, resulting in dysmenorrhoea and 
haemorrhoids. Congestion of pelvic viscera, with haemorrhoids, 
especially in latter months of pregnancy. Dropsy from cardiac 
disease. Palpitation; in patients subject to piles and indigestion; 
heart's action persistently rapid but weak. After heart is relieved 
old piles reappear, or suppressed menses return. Chronic, painful,  
bleeding piles; sensation as if sticks, sand or gravel had lodged in 
rectum (Aesc.). Haemorrhoidal dysentery with tenesmus. Alternate 
constipation and diarrhoea; congestive inertia of lower bowel; 
stools sluggish and hard with pain and great flatulence. 
Constipation. Pruritus in pregnancy with haemorrhoids, unable to 
lie down.
Relations. - in heart disease complicated with haemorrhoids 
consult Collinsonia when Cac., Dig., and other remedies fail. Has 
cured colic after Col. and Nux had failed. Compare: Aesc., Aloe, 
Cham., Nux, Sulph.
Aggravation. - The slightest mental emotion or excitement 
aggravates the symptoms (Arg. n.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Colocynthis.
Squirting Cucumber. (Cucurbitaceae)
Agonizing pain in abdomen causing patient to bend double, with 
restlessness, twisting and turning to obtain relief; > by hard 
pressure (> by heat, Mag. p.). Pains: are worse after eating or 
drinking; compel patient to bend double (Mag. p. - < by bending 
double, Dios.); menses, suppressed by chagrin, colic pains. 
Exteremely irritable, impatient; becomes angry or offended on 
being questioned. Irritable; throws things out of his hands. 
Affections from anger, with indignation - colic, vomiting, 
diarrhoea and suppression of menses (Cham., Staph.). Vertigo: 
when quickly turning head, especially to the left, as if he would 
fall; from stimulants. Sciatica: crampy pain in hip, as though 
screwd in a vise; lies upon affected side. Shooting pain, like 
lightening-shocks, down the whole limb, left hip, left thigh, left 
knee, into popliteal fossa.
Relations. - Complemenatary: Merc. in dysentry, with great 
tenesmus. Compare: Graph. intense pain along right sciatic never, 
darting, cutting, from right hip joint down to foot; < lying down, 
motion, stepping; > by sitting. Compare with Staph. in ovarian or 
other diseases from bad effects of anger, reserved indignation or 
silent grief.
Aggravation. - Anger and indignation; mortification caused by 
offense (Staph., Lyc.); cheese < colic.
Amelioration. - From doubling up; hard pressure.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Conium Maculatum.
Hemlock Poison (Umbelliferae)
The "Balm of Gilead" for diseases of old maids and women during 
and after climacteric. Especially for diseases of old men; old 
maids; old bachelors; with rigid muscular fibre; persons with light 
hair who are easily excited; strong persons of sedentary habits. 
Debility of old people; complaints caused by a blow or fall; 
cancerous and scrofulous persons with enlarged glands; rigid fibre. 
No inclination for business or study; indolent, indifferent, takes no 
interest in anything. Memory weak, unable to sustain any mental 
effort. Morose; easily vexed; domineering, quarrelsome, scolds, 
will not bear contradiction (Aur.); excitement of any kind causes 
mental depression. Dreads being alone, yet avoids society (Kali c., 
Lyc.). Glandular induration of stony hardness; of mammae and 
testicles in persons of cancerous tendency; after bruises and 
injuries of glands (compare, Aster. rub.). Breasts sore, hard and 
painful before and during menstruation (Lac c., Kali c.). Vertigo: 
especially when lying down or turning in bed; moving the head 
slightly, or even the eyes; must keep the head perfectly still; on 
turning the head to the left (Col.); of old people; with ovarian and 
uterine complaints. Cough: in spasmodic paroxysms caused by dry 
spot in larynx (in throat, Act.); with itching in chest and throat 
(Iod.); worse at night, when lying down, and during pregnancy 
(Caust., Kali br.). Great difficulty in voiding urine; flow intermits, 
then flows again; prostratic or uterine affections. Menses: feeble,  
suppressed; too late, scanty, of short duration; with rash of small 
red pimples over body which ceases with the flow (Dul.); stopped 
by taking cold; by putting hands in cold water (Lac d.). 
Leucorrhoea: ten days after menses (Bor., Bov.); acrid; bloody; 
milky; profuse; thick; intermits. Bad effects: of suppressed sexual 
desire, or suppressed menses; non-gratification of sexual instinct, 
or from excessive indulgence. Aversion to light without 
inflammation of eyes; worse from using eyes in artificial light; 
often the students' remedy for night work; intense photophobia 
(Psor.). Sweat day and night, as soon as one sleeps, or even when 
closing the eyes (Cinch.).
Relations. - Patients requiring Conium often improve from wine 
or stimulants, though persons susceptible to Conium cannot take 
alcoholic stimulants when in health. Compare: Arn., Rhus in 
contusions; Ars., Aster, in cancer; Cal., Psor. in glandular 
swellings. Is followed well: by, Psor. in tumors of mammae with 
threatening malignancy.
Aggravation. - At night; lying down; turning or rising up, in bed; 
celibacy.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Crocus Sativus.
Saffron (Iridaccae)
Frequent and extreme changes in sensations; sudden, from the 
greatest hilarity to the deepest despondency (Ign., Nux m.). 
Excessively happy, affectionate, wants to kiss everybody; next 
moment in a rage. Haemorrhage from any part, blood black, viscid, 
clotted, forming into long black strings hanging from the 
bleeding surface (Elaps). Headache; during climacteric, 
throbbing, pulsating, < during two or three days of accustomed 
menstrual flow; nervous or menstrual headache before, during, or 
after flow (Lach., Lil., Sec.). Eyes: sensation, as if room were filled 
with smoke; as if had been weeping; as of cold wind blowing 
across the eyes; closing lids tightly gives >. Nosebleed: black, 
tenacious, stringy, every drop can be turned into a thread; with 
cold sweat in large drops on forehead (cold sweat, but wants to be 
fanned; with bright red blood, Carbo veg.); in children who 
develop too rapidly (Cal., Phos.). Dysmenorrhoea: flow black; 
stringy, clotted (Ust.). Sensation as if something alive were moving 
in the stomach, abdomen, uterus, arms or other parts of the body 
(Sab., Thuja, Sulph.); with nausea and faintness. Chorea and 
hysteria with great hilarity, singing and dancing (Tar.); alternating 
with melancholy and rage. Spasmodic contractions and twitchings 
of single sets of muscles (Agar., Ign., Zinc.).
Relation. - Nux, Puls. or Sulph. follow Crocus well in nearly all 
complaints. Compare: In menstrual derangements (Ust.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Crotalus Horridus.
Poison of Rattlesnake (Crotalidae)
Is indicated in strumous, debilitated, haemorrhagic, broken-down 
constitutions; during zymotic diseases; in inebriates; tendency to 
carbuncles or blood boils (Anthr.). Diseases caused by a previous 
low state of the system; low septic typhoid or malarial fever; 
chronic alcoholism; exhausted vital force; genuine collapse. 
Apoplexy; apoplectic convulsions in inebriates, haemorrhagic or 
broken down constitutions. Haemorrhagic diathesis; blood flows 
from eyes, ears, nose, and every orifice of the body; bloody sweat. 
Yellow color of conjunctiva; clears up vision after keratitis, or 
kerato-iritis. Malignant jaundice; haematic rather than hepatic. 
Purpura haemorrhagica; comes on suddenly from all orifices, skin, 
nails, gums. Tongue fiery red, smooth and polished (Pyr.); 
intensely swollen. Malignant diphtheria or scarlatina; oedema or 
gangrene of fauces or tonsils; pain < from empty swallowing; if 
vomiting or diarrhoea come on. Prostration of vital force; pulse 
scarely felt; blood poisoning (Pyr.). Vomiting: bilious, with 
anxiety and weak pulse; every month after menstruation; cannot lie 
on right side or back without instantly producing dark, green 
vomiting; black or coffee grounds, of yellow fever. Diarrhoea; 
stools black, thin; like coffee-grounds; offense; from noxious 
effluvia or septic matters in food or drinks; from "high game" 
(Pyr.); during yellow fever, cholera, typhoid, typhus. Intestinal 
haemorrhage when occurring in typical septic, or zymotic disease; 
blood dark, fluid, non-coagulable. Dissecting wounds; insect 
stings; bad effects of vaccination. Vicarious menstruation; in 
debilitated constitutions (Dig., Phos.). Menopause: intense 
flushings and drenching perspirations; faintness and sinking at 
stomach; prolonged metrorrhagia, dark, fluid, offensive; profound 
anaemia. Malignant diseases of uterus, great tendency to 
haemorrhage, blood dark, fluid, offensive.
Relations. - Compare: Elaps, Lach., Naja, Pyr. In Lach., skin cold 
and clammy; Crot. cold and dry; Elaps, affections of right lung, 
expectoration of black blood.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Croton Tiglium.
Croton Oil Seeds. (Euphorbiaccae)
Affects mucous membrane of intestinal tract, producing 
transudations of watery portions of blood, a copious, watery 
diarrhoea (Ver.), and develops an acute eczema over the whole 
body (Rhus). The bowels are moved as if by spasmodic jerks, 
"coming out like a shot" (Gamb.); as soon as patient eats, drinks, 
or even while eating; yellow watery stool. Constant urging to stool 
followed by sudden evacuation, which is shot out of the rectum 
(Gamb., Grat., Pod., Thuja). Swashing sensation in intestines, as 
from water, before stool (rumbling before stool, Aloe). Drawing 
pain through the chest from breast to scapula, of same side every 
time the child nurses; nipple very sore. Intense itching of skin, but 
so tender is unable to scratch; > by gentle rubbing; eczema over 
whole body. Intense itching of genitals of both sexes (Rhus); 
vesicular eruption on male; so sensitive and sore is unable to 
scratch. Cough: as soon as the head touched the pillow a 
spasmodic paroxysm of cough set in; suffocated, must walk about 
the room or sleep in a chair.
Relations. - Compare: Kali br., Phos. in chronic infantile 
diarrhoea; Sil. pain from nipple through to back when nursing.
Aggravation. - Diarrhoea; every motion; after drinking; while 
eating or nursing (Arg. n., Ars.); during summer; from fruit and 
sweetmeats (Gamb.); the least food or drink.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cuprum Metallicum.
Copper (CN)
Spasms and cramps: symptoms disposed to appear periodically 
and in groups. Mental and physical exhaustion from over-exertion 
of mind and loss of sleep (Coc., Nux); attacks of unconquerable 
anxiety. A strong, sweetish, metallic, copper taste in the mouth 
with flow of saliva (Rhus). Constant prostration and retraction of 
the tongue, like a snake (Lach.). When drinking, the fluid descends 
with a gurgling sound (Ars., Thuja). Cholera morbus or Asiatic 
cholera, with cramps in abdomen and calves of legs. Bad effects of  
re-percussed eruptions (of non-developed, Zinc.), resulting in 
brain affections, spasms, convulsions, vomiting; of suppressed 
foot-sweat (Sil., Zinc.). Convulsions, with blue face and clenched 
thumbs. Cramps in the extremeties; pains, soles, calves with great 
weariness of limbs. Clonic spasms, beginning in fingers and toes, 
and spreading over entire body; during pregnancy; puerperal 
convulsions; after fright or vexation; from metastasis from other 
organs to brain (Zinc.). Paralysis of tongue; imperfect stammering 
speech. Epilepsy: aura begins in knees and ascends; < at night 
during sleep (Bufo); about new moon, at regular intervals 
(menses); from a fall or blow upon the head; from getting wet. 
Cough has a gurgling sound, as if water was being poured from a 
bottle. Cough, > by drinking cold water (Caust. - < by drinking 
cold water, Spong.). Whooping cough: long-lasting, suffocating, 
spasmodic cough; unable to speak; breathless, blue face, rigid,  
stiff; three attacks successively (Stan.); vomiting of solid food after 
regaining consciousness (Can.); cataleptic spasm with each 
paroxysm. After pains; sever, distressing, in calves and soles.
Relations. - Complementary: Calcarea. Compare: Ars. and Ver. in 
cholera and cholera morbus; Ipecac, the vegetable analogue. Ver. 
follows well in whooping cough and cholera. Apis and Zinc. in 
convulsions from suppressed exanthems.
Aggravation. - Cold air; cold wind; at night; suppressed foot 
sweat or exanthema.
Amelioration. - Nausea, vomiting and cough, by a swallow of 
cold water.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Cyclamen Europaeum.
Sow Bread. (Primulaccae.)
Best suited for leuco-phlegmatic persons with anaemic or chlorotic 
conditions; easily fatigued, and in consequence not inclined to any 
kind of labor; feeble or suspended functions of organs or special 
senses. Pale, chlorotic; deranged menses (Fer., Puls.), 
accompanied by vertigo, headache, dim vision. Pains; pressive, 
drawing or tearing of parts where bone lie near the surface. 
Ailments: from suppressed grief and terrors of conscience; from 
duty not done or bad act committed. Great sadness and 
peevishness, irritable, morose, ill-humored; inclined to weep; 
desire for solitude; aversion to open air (rev. of Puls.). Headache 
in anaemic patients, with flickering before eyes or dim vision, on 
rising in morning. Flickering before eyes, fiery sparks, as of 
various colors, glittering needles, dim vision of fog or smoke. 
Satiety after a few mouthfuls (Lyc.), food then becomes repugnant, 
causes nausea in throat and palate. Saliva and all food has a salty 
taste; pork disagrees. Menses: too early, too profuse, black and 
clotted; membraneous (too late, pale, scanty, Puls.); better during 
the flow (worse, Act., Puls.). Burning sore pain in heels, when 
sitting, standing or walking in open air (Agar., Caust., Val., Phyt.).
Relations. - Compare: Puls., Cinch., Fer. in chlorosis, and anaemic 
affections; Croc., Thuja as if some thing alive in abdomen.
Aggravation. - Open air; cold water; cold bathing; menses < 
sitting and lying at night.
Amelioration. - In a warm room; in-doors; menses > waling 
(leucorrhoea, < sitting, > walking, Cac., Coc.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Digitalis Purpurea.
Foxglove. (Scrophulariaceae)
Sudden flushes of heat, followed by great nervous weakness and 
irregular intermitting pulse, occurring at the climacteric; < by least 
motion. Weak heart without valvular complications. Sensation as  
if heart would stop beating if she moved (Cocaine - fears that 
unless constantly on the move, heart will cease beating, Gels.). 
Faintness or sinking at the stomach; exhaustion; extreme 
prostration; feels as if he were dying. Night emissions, with great 
weakness of genitals after coitus. Great weakness of chest, cannot 
bear to talk (Stan.). Stools: very light, ash-colored; delayed, chalky 
(Chel., Pod.); almost white (Cal., Cinch.); pipe-stem stool; 
involuntary. Pulse full, irregular, very slow and weak; 
intermitting every third, fifth or seventh beat. Face pale, 
deathlike appearance and bluish-red. Blueness of skin, eyelids; lips 
and tongue. Respiration irregular, difficult, deep sighing. The 
fingers "go to sleep" frequently and easily. Dropsy: post-
scarlatinal; in Bright's disease; with suppression of urine; of 
internal and external parts; with fainting when there are organic 
affections of the heart (with soreness in uterine region, Conv.). 
Fatal syncope may occur when being raised to upright position.
Relations. - Cinchona antidotes the direct action of Digitalis and 
increases the anxiety.
Aggravation. - When sitting, especially when sitting erect; 
motion.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Dioscorea Villosa.
Wild Yam. (Dioscoreaceae.)
Persons of feeble digestive powers, old or young. Flatulence after 
meals or after eating, especially of tea-drinkers; are often subject to 
violent colic. Griping pains in abdomen about umbilicus. Violent 
twisting colic, occurring in regular paroxysms, as if intestines were 
grasped and twisted by a powerful hand. Colic pains: < from 
bending forward and while lying; > on standing erect or bending 
backwards (rev. of Col.). Emissions during sleep; vivid dreams of 
women all night (Staph.); knees weak; genitals cold; great 
despondency (Staph.). Felons; early when pains are sharp and 
agonizing, when pricking is first felt; nails brittle. Disposition to 
paronychia (Hep.).
Relations. - Compare: Col., Phos., Pod., Rhus, Sil.
Aggravation. - Lying; sitting; bending double.
Amelioration. - Motion; walking difficult, compelled to walk even 
though tired.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Diphtherinum.
Homeopathic Antitoxin. (A Nosode.)
Especially adapted to the strumous diathesis; scrofulous, psoric or 
tuberculous persons, prone to catarrhal affections of throat and 
respiratory mucus membranes. Patients with weak or exhausted 
vitality hence are extremely susceptible to the diphtheritic virus; 
when the attack from the onset tends to malignancy (Lac. c., Mer. 
cy.). Painless diphtheria; symptoms almost or entirely objective; 
patient too weak, apathetic or too prostrated to complain; sopor or 
stupor, but easily aroused when spoken to (Bap., Sulph.). Dark red 
swelling of tonsils and palatine arches; parotid and cervical glands 
greatly swollen; breath and discharges from throat, nose and mouth 
very offensive; tongue swollen, very red, little coating. 
Diphtheritic membrane, thick, dark gray or brownish black; 
temperature low or subnormal, pulse weak and rapid; extremities 
cold and marked debility; patient lies in a semi-stupid condition; 
eyes dull, besotted (Apis, Bap.). Epistaxis or profound prostration 
from very onset of attack (Ali., Apis, Carb. ac.); collapse almost at 
very beginning (Crot., Mer. cy.); pulse weak, rapid and vital 
reaction very low. Swallows without pain, but fluids are vomited 
or returned by the nose; breath horribly offensive. Laryngeal 
diphtheria, after Chlor., Kali bi., or Lac c. fail; post diphtheritic 
paralysis, after Caust., Gels. fail. When the patient from the first 
seems doomed, and the most carefully selected remedies fail to  
relieve or permanently improve. The above are cured symptoms, 
verifications which the author has found guiding and reliable for 
twenty-five years. The remedy is prepared, like all nosodes and 
animal poisons, according to the Homeopathic Pharmacopoea, and 
like all homeopathic remedies is entirely safe when given the sick. 
Like all the nosodes, it is practically worthless in potencies below 
the 30th; its curative value also increases with increase of potency 
from the 200th to the m. and c. m. It need not and should not be 
repeated too frequently. It will cure in every case that crude 
antitoxin will and is not only easy to administer, but safe and 
entirely free from dangerous sequellae. Besides, it is homeopathic. 
The author has used it for twenty-five years as a prophylactic and 
has never known a second case of diphtheria to occur in a family 
after it had been administered. The profession is asked to put it to 
the test and publish the failures to the world.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Drosera Rotundifolia.
Sundew. (Droseraceae.)
Whooping-cough with violent paroxysms which follow each other 
rapidly, is scarcely able to get breath (wakes at 6-7 a. m. and does 
not cease coughing until a large quantity of tenacious mucus is 
raised, Coc. c. - profuse epistaxis during every paroxysm, Ind.; 
"minute gun" during the day, whooping at night, Cor. r.). Deep 
sounding, hoarse barking cough (Verb.), < after midnight, during 
or after measles; spasmodic, with gagging, retching and vomiting 
(Bry., Kali c.). Constant, titillating cough in children, begins as 
soon as head touches pillow at night (Bell., Hyos, Rum.). 
Nocturnal cough of young persons in phthisis; bloody or purulent 
sputa. Cough: < by warmth, drinking, singing, laughing, weeping, 
lying down, after midnight. During cough; vomiting of water, 
mucus, and often bleeding at the nose and mouth (Cup.). Sensation 
of feather in larynx, exciting cough. Diseases prevailing during 
epidemic pertusis. Clergyman's sore throat; with rough, scraping, 
dry sensation deep in the fauces; voice hoarse, deep, toneless, 
cracked, requires exertion to speak (Arum.). Constriction and 
crawling in larynx; hoarseness, and yellow or green sputa. 
Laryngeal phthisis following whooping-cough (bronchial catarrh 
following, Coc. c.).
Relations. - Complementary: to, Nux vomica. Follows well: after, 
Samb., Sulph., Ver. Is followed: by, Cal., Puls., Sulph. Compare: 
Cina, Coral, Cup., Ipec., Samb. in spasmodic coughs. Often 
relieves the constant, distressing night-cough in tuberculosis. 
Hahnemann says (Mat. Med. Pura.): "One single dose of the 30th 
potency is sufficient to cure entirely epidemic whooping cough. 
The cure takes place surely between seven and eight days. Never 
give a second dose immediately after the first; it would not only 
prevent the good effect of the former, but would be injurious."
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Dulcamara.
Bitter-sweet. (Solanaceae.)
Adapted to persons of phlegmatic scrofulous constitutions; restless, 
irritable. Catarrhal rheumatism or skin affections, brought on or 
aggravated by exposure to cold, damp, rainy weather, or sudden 
changes in hot weather (Bry.). Increased secretions of mucous 
membranes; perspiration being suppressed from cold. Patients 
living or working in a damp, cold basement, or a milk dairy (Aran., 
Ars., Nat. s.). Mental confusion; cannot find the right word for 
anything. Skin is delicate, sensitive to cold, liable to eruptions, 
especially urticaria; every time patient takes cold or is long 
exposed to cold. Anasarca; after ague, rheumatism, scarlet fever. 
Dropsy: after suppressed sweat; suppressed eruptions; exposure to 
cold. Diarrhoea: from taking cold in damp places, or during damp, 
foggy weather; change from warm to cold weather (Bry.). 
Catarrhal ischuria in grown-up children, with milky urine; from 
wading with bare feet in cold water; involuntary. Rash before the 
menses (Con. - during profuse menses, Bell., Graph.). Urticaria 
over whole body, no fever; itching burns after scratching; < in 
warmth, > in cold. Thick, brown-yellow crusts on scalp, face, 
forehead, temples, chin; with reddish borders, bleeding when 
scratched. Warts, fleshy, large, smooth; on face or back of hands 
and fingers (Thuja.).
Relations. - Complementary: to, Baryta carb., Kali s. 
Incompatible: with, Acet. ac., Bell., Lach., should not be used 
before or after. Follows well: after, Cal., Bry., Lyc., Rhus, Sep. 
Similar: to, Mer., in ptyalism, glandular swellings, bronchitis, 
diarrhoea; susceptibility to weather changes; night pains; to, Kali s. 
the chemical analogue. For the bad effects or abuse of Mercury.
Aggravation. - From cold in general; cold air; cold wet weather; 
suppressed menstruation, eruptions, sweat.
Amelioration. - From moving about (Fer., Rhus).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Equisetum Hyemale.
Scouring Rush. (Equisetaceae.)
Sever dull pain in the bladder, as from distension, not > after 
urinating. Frequent and intolerable urging to urinate, with severe 
pain at close of urination (Berb., Sars., Thuja). Constant desire to 
urinate; large quantity of clear, watery urine, without > (scanty, a 
few drops, Apis, Canth.). Sharp, burning, cutting pain in urethra 
while urinating. Paralysis of bladder in old women. Enuresis 
diurna et nocturna: profuse watery urine, where habit is the only 
ascertainable cause.
Relations. - Compare: Apis, Canth., Fer. p., Puls., Squilla.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Eupatorium Perfoliatum.
Boneset. (Compositae.)
Adapted to diseases of old people; worn-out constitutions,  
especially from inebriety; cachexia, from prolonged or frequent 
attacks of bilious or intermittent fevers. Bruised feeling, as if 
broken, all over the body (Arn., Bellis, Pyr.). Bone pains 
affecting back, head, chest, limbs, especially the wrists, as if 
dislocated. The more general and severe, the better adapted 
(compare, Bry., Mer.). Painful soreness of eyeballs; coryza,  
aching in every bone; great prostration in epidemic influenza (Lac. 
c.). Pains come quickly and go quickly and go away quickly (Bell., 
Mag. p., Eup. pur.). Vertigo; sensation as if falling to the left 
(cannot turn the head to the left for fear of alling, Col.). Cough: 
chronic; loose with hectic; chest sore, must support it with hands 
(Bry., Nat. c.); < at night; following measles or suppressed 
intermittents. Fever: chill to 9 a. m. one day, at noon the next day; 
bitter vomiting at close of chill; drinking hastens chill and causes 
vomiting; bone pains, before and during chill. Insatiable thirst  
before and during chill and fever; knows chill is coming because 
he cannot drink enough.
Relations. - Is followed well: by, Nat. m. and Sep. Compare: 
Chel., Pod., Lyc., in jaundiced conditions. Bryonia is the nearest 
analogue, having free sweat, but pains keep patient quiet; while 
Eup. has scanty sweat and pains make patient restless.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Euphrasia.
Eyebright. (Scrophularaceae.)
Bad effects from falls, contusions or mechanical injuries of 
external parts (Arn.). Catarrhal affections of mucous membranes, 
especially of the eyes and nose. Profuse acrid lachrymation, with 
profuse, bland coryza (reverse of All. c.). The eyes water all the 
time and are agglutinated in the morning; margins of lids red, 
swollen, burning. Profuse fluent coryza in morning with violent 
cough and abundant expectoration, < from exposure to warm south 
wind. When attempting to clear the throat of an offensive mucus in 
the morning, gagging until he vomits the breakfast just eaten 
(Bry.). Profuse expectoration of mucus by voluntary hawking, < on 
rising in morning. Amenorrhoea, with catarrhal symptoms of eyes 
and nose; profuse acrid lachrymation. Menses: painful, regular, 
now lasting only one hour; or late, scanty, short, lasting only one 
day (Bar.). Pertussis: excessive lachrymation during cough; cough 
only in day time (Fer., Nat. m.).
Relations. - Similar: to, Puls. in affections of the eyes; reverse of 
All. c. in lachrymation and coryza.
Aggravation. - In the evening, in bed, indoors, warmth, moisture; 
after exposure to south wind; when touched (Hep.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Ferrum Metallicum.
Iron. (The Element.)
Persons of sanguine temperament;; pettish, quarrelsome, 
disputative, easily excited, least contradiction angers (Anac., Coc., 
Ign.); > mental exertion. Irritability: slight noises like crackling of 
paper drive him to despair (Asar., Tar.). Women who are weak, 
delicate, chlorotic, yet have a fiery red face. Extreme paleness of 
the face, lips and mucous membranes which becomes red and 
flushed on the least pain, emotion or exertion. Blushing (Amyl., 
Coca.). Erethitic chlorosis, worse in winter. Red parts become 
white; face, lips, tongue and mucous membrane of mouth. Vertigo: 
with balancing sensation,, as if on water; on seeing flowing water; 
when walking over water, as when crossing a bridge (Lys.); on 
descending (Bor., Sanic.). Headache: hammering, beating, 
pulsating pains, must lie down; with aversion to eating or drinking. 
For two, three or four days every two or three weeks. Menses: too 
early, too profuse, too long lasting, with fiery red face; ringing in 
the ears; intermit two or three days and then return; flow pale,  
watery, debilitating. Haemorrhagic diathesis; blood bright red, 
coagulates easily (Fer. p., Ipec., Phos.). Regurgitation and 
eructation of food in mouthfuls (Alum.). without nausea. Canine 
hunger, or loss of appetite, with extreme dislike for all food. 
Vomiting: immediately after midnight; of ingesta, as soon as food 
is eaten; leaves table suddenly and with one effort vomits 
everything eaten, can sit down and eat again; sour, acid (Lyc., Sul. 
ac.). Diarrhoea: undigested stools at night, or while eating or 
drinking (Crot. t.); painless with a good appetite; of consumptives 
[Compare Kent's Lectures]. Constipation: from intestinal atony; 
ineffectual urging; stools hard, difficult, followed by backache or 
cramping pain in rectum; prolapsus recti of children; itching on 
anus at night. Always feels better by walking slowly about, 
although weakness obliges the patient to lie down. Cough only in 
the day time (Euphr.); relieved by lying down; > by eating 
(Spong.). Dropsy; after loss of vital fluids; abuse of quinine; 
suppressed intermittent (Carbo v., Cinch.).
Relations. - Complementary: to, Alum., Cinch. Cinch.: the 
vegetable analogue follows well in nearly all diseases, acute or 
chronic. Should never be given in syphilis; always aggravates the 
condition.
Aggravation. - At night; at rest, especially while sitting still.
Amelioration. - Walking slowly about; in summer.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Fluoric acid.
Hydrofluoric Acid. (HF.)
Complaints of old age, or of premature old age; in syphilitic 
mercurial dyscrasia; young people look old. Increased ability to 
exercise without danger (Coca.); is less affected by excessive heat 
of summer or cold of winter. Old cicatrices become red around 
edges, and threaten to become open ulcers (Caust., Graph.). 
Varicose veins and ulcers, obstinate, long standing cases, in 
women who have borne many children. Caries and necrosis, 
especially of long bones, psoric or syphilitic, abuse of mercury or 
silica (Angus.). Naenuv, flat, of children (r. temple); capillary 
aneurism (compare, Cal. fl., Tub.). Ulcers: red edges and vesicles; 
decubitus; copious discharge; < from warmth, > from cold; violent 
pains, like streaks of lightning, confined to a small spot. Rapid 
caries of teeth; fistula dentalis or lachrymalis; exostosis of bone so 
face (Hekla).
Relations. - Complementary: Coca, Sil. Follows well: after, Ars. in 
ascites of drunkards; after, Kali c. in hip disease; after, Coff., 
Staph. in sensitive teeth; after, Phos. ac. in diabetes; after Sil., 
Symph. in bone diseases; after, Spong. in goitre.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Gelsemium.
Yellow Jasmine. (Loganiaceae)
For children, young people, especially women of a nervous, 
hysterical temperament (Croc., Ign.). Complete relaxation and 
prostration of whole muscular system with entire motor paralysis. 
Excitable, irritable, sensitive; for the nervous affections of onanists 
of both sexes (Kali p.). Bad effects from fright, fear, exciting news 
and sudden motions (Ign. - from pleasant surprise, Coff.). Fear of 
death (Ars.); utter lack of courage. The anticipation of any unusual 
ordeal, preparing for church, theatre, or to meet an engagement, 
brings on diarrhoea; stage fright, nervous dread of appearing in 
public (Arg. n.). General depression from heat of sun or summer. 
Weakness and trembling; of tongue, hands, legs; of the entire body. 
Desire to be quiet, to be let alone; does not wish to speak or have 
any one near her, even if the person be silent (Ign.). Vertigo, 
spreading from the occiput (Sil.); with diplopia, dim vision, loss of 
sight; seems intoxicated when trying to move. Children; fear of 
falling, grasp the crib or seize the nurse (Bor., Sanic.). Headache; 
preceded by blindness (Kali bi.), > by profuse urination. Lack of 
muscular co-ordination; confused; muscles refuse to obey the 
will. Headache: beginning in the cervical spine; pains extend over 
head, causing bursting sensation in forehead and eyeballs (Sang., 
Sil., begins in the same way, but semi-lateral); < by mental 
exertion; from smoking; heat of sun; lying with head low. 
Sensation of band around the head above eyes (Carb. ac., Sulph.); 
scalp sore to touch. Fears that unless on the move heart will cease 
beating (fears it would cease beating if she moved, Dig.). Slow 
pulse of old age. Great heaviness of the eyelids; cannot keep them 
open (Caust., Graph., Sep.). Chill without thirst, especially along 
spine, running up and down the back in rapid, wave-like 
succession from sacrum to occiput.
Relations. - Compare: Bap. in threatening typhoid fever; Ipecac. in 
dumb ague, after suppression by quinine.
Aggravation. - Damp weather; before a thunderstorm; mental 
emotion or excitement; bad news; tobacco smoking; when thinking 
of his ailments; when spoken to of his loss.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Glonoine.
Nitro-glycerine. (C3H4(NO2)O3)
Nervous temperament; plethoric, florid, sensitive women; persons 
readily affected. Bad effects of mental excitement, fright, fear, 
mechanical injuries and their later consequences; from having the 
hair cut. (Acon., Bell.). Head troubles: from working under gas-
light, when heat falls on head; cannot bear heat about the head, 
heat of stove or walking in the sun (Lach., Nat. c.). Cerebral 
congestion, or alternate congestion of the head and heart. Head: 
feels enormously large; as if skull were too small for brain; 
sunstroke and sun headache; increases and decreases every day 
with the sun (Kal., Nat. c.). Terrific shock in the head, synchronous 
with the pulse. Throbbing, pulsating headache; holds head with 
both hands; could not lie down, "the pillow would beat.". Brain 
feels too large, full, bursting; blood seems to be pumped upwards; 
throbs at every jar, step, pulse. Intense congestion of brain from 
delayed or suppressed menses; headache in place of menses. 
Headache: occurring after profuse uterine haemorrhage; rush of  
blood to head, in pregnant women. Violent palpitation, with 
throbbing in carotids; heart's action labored, oppressed; blood 
seems to rush to heart, and rapidly to head. Convulsions of 
children from cerebral congestion; meningitis, during dentition, 
cases that seem to call for Belladonna. Children get sick in the 
evening when sitting before and open coal fire, or falling asleep 
there. Flushes of heat; at the climacteric (Amyl., Bell., Lach.); with 
the catmenia (Fer., Sang.).
Relations. - Compare: Amyl., Bell., Ferr., Gels., Melil., Stram.
Aggravation. - In the sun, exposure to sun's rays; gas- light; 
overheating; jar; stooping; ascending; touch of hat; having the hair 
cut.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Graphites.
Black Lead. (Amorphous Carbon.)
Suited to women, inclined to obesity, who suffer from habitual 
constipation; with a history of delayed menstruation. "What 
Pulsatilla is at puberty, Graphites is at the climacteric.". Excessive 
cautiousness; timid; hesitates; unable to decide about anything 
(Puls.). Fidgety while sitting at work (Zinc.). Sad, despondent; 
music makes her weep; thinks of nothing but death (music is 
intolerable, Nat. c., Sab.). Eczema of lids; eruption moist and 
fissured; lids red and margins covered with scales or crusts. Sexual  
debility from sexual abuse. Menses: too scanty, pale, late with 
violent colic; irregular; delayed from getting feet wet (Puls.). 
Morning sickness during menstruation; very weak and prostrated 
(Alum., Carbo an., Coc.). Leucorrhoea: acrid, excoriating; occurs 
in gushes day and night; before and after menses (before Sep., 
after, Kreos.). Hard cicatrices remaining after mammary abscess, 
retarding the flow of milk; cancer of breast, from old scars and 
repeated abscesses. Unhealthy skin; every injury suppurates 
(Hep.); old cicatrices break open again; eruptions upon the ears, 
between fingers and toes and on various parts of body, from which 
oozes a watery, transparent sticky fluid. The nails brittle, 
crumbling, deformed (Ant. c.); painful, sore, as if ulcerated; thick 
and crippled. Cracks or fissures in ends of fingers, nipples, labial 
comminssures; of anus; between the toes. Burning round spot on 
vertex (Cal., Sulph. - cold spot, Sep., Ver.). Cataleptic condition; 
conscious, but without power to move or speak. Takes cold easily, 
sensitive to draught of air (Bor., Cal., Hep., Nux). Suffering parts 
emaciate. Hears better when in a noise; when riding in a carriage 
or car, when there is a rumbling sound (Nit. ac.). Diarrhoea: stools 
brown, fluid, mixed with undigested substances, and of an 
intolerable odor; often caused by suppressed eruptions (Psor.). 
Chronic constipation; stool difficult, large, hard, knotty, with 
lumps united by mucous threads; too large (Sulph.); smarting sore 
pain in anus after stool. Children: impudent, teasing, laugh at 
reprimands. Sensation of cobwebs on forehead, tries hard to brush 
it off (Bar., Bor., Brom., Ran. s.). Phlegmonus erysipelas: of face, 
with burning, stinging pain; commencing on right side, going to 
left; after application of iodine. Decided aversion to coition (both 
sexes).
Relations. - Complementary: Caust., Hep., Lyc. Graphites follows 
well: after Lyc., Puls., after Cal. in obesity of young women with 
large amount of unhealthy adipose tissue; follows Sulph. well in 
skin affections; after Sepia in gushing leucorrhoea. Similar: to, 
Lyc., Puls. in menstrual troubles.
Aggravation. - At night, during and after menstruation.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Hamamelis Virginica.
Witch Hazel. (Hamamclaceae.)
This shrub flowers from September to November, when the leaves 
are falling. The seeds mature the following summer. It is adapted 
to venous haemorrhage from every orifice of the body; nose, lungs, 
bowels, uterus, bladder. Venous congestion; passive, of skin and 
mucous membranes; phlebitis, varicose veins; ulcers, varicose, 
with stinging, pricking pain; haemorrhoids. Patients, subject to 
varicose veins, take cold easily from every exposure, especially in 
warm, moist air. "Is the Aconite of the venous capillary system.". 
Bruised soreness of affected parts (Arn.); rheumatism, articular 
and muscular. Wounds: incised, lacerated, contused; injuries from 
falls; checks haemorrhage, removes pain and soreness (Arn.). 
Chronic effects of mechanical injuries (Con.). Traumatic 
conjunctivitis; sugillations, or extravasations into chambers of eye; 
from severe coughing; intense soreness (Arn., Calen., Led.). 
Nosebleed: flow passive, long-lasting, blood non-coagulable 
(Crot.); profuse > headache (Mel.); idiopathic, traumatic, vicarious, 
of childhood. Haemorrhage: profuse, dark, grumous, from 
ulceration of bowels (Crot.); uterine, active or passive; after a fall 
or rough riding; vicarious menstruation; no mental anxiety. 
Haemoptysis: tickling cough, with taste of blood or sulphur; 
venous, without effort or coughing; sometimes monthly, for years. 
Profuse discharges, which simulate a haemorrhage, and form a 
drain upon system as severe as loss of blood. Haemorrhoids: 
bleeding profusely; with burning, soreness, fullness, heaviness; as 
if back would break; urging to stool; bluish color; anus feels sore 
and raw. Menses: flow, dark and profuse; with soreness in 
abdomen; after a blow on ovary, or a fall; all suffering < at 
menstrual period (Act., Puls.). Uterine haemorrhage active or 
passive; from jolting while riding over rough roads; bearing down 
pain in back. After haemorrhage from piles, prostration out of all 
proportion to amount of blood lost (Hydr.). Bad effects from loss 
of blood (Cinch.).
Relations. - Complementary: Ferrum, in haemorrhages and the 
haemorrhagic diathesis. Compare: Arn., Calen., for traumatic, and 
to hasten absorption of introcular haemorrhage.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Helleborus Niger.
Christmas Rose. (Ranunculaceae.)
Weakly, delicate,, psoric children; prone to brain troubles (Bell., 
Cal., Tub.); with serous effusion. Melancholy: woeful; despairing; 
silent; with anguish; after typhoid; in girls at puberty, or when 
menses fail to return after appearing. Irritable, easily angered; 
consolation < (Ign., Nat., Sep., Sil.); does not want to be disturbed 
(Gels., Nat.); Unconscious; stupid; answers slowly when 
questioned; a picture of acute idiocy (of chronic, Bar. c.). Brain 
symptoms during dentition (Bell., Pod.); threatening effusion 
(Apis., Tub.). Meningitis: acute, cerebro-spinal, tubercular, with 
exudation; paralysis more or less complete; with the cri 
encephalique. Vacant, thoughtless staring; eyes wide open; 
insensible to light; pupils dilated, or alternately contracted and 
dilated. Soporous sleep, with screams, shrieks, starts. 
Hydrocephalus, post-scarlatinal or tubercular which develops 
rapidly (Apis, Sulph., Tub.); automatic motion of one arm and leg. 
Convulsions with extreme coldness of body, except head or 
occiput, which may be hot (Arn.). Greedily swallows cold water; 
bites spoon, but remains unconscious. Chewing motion of the 
mouth; corners of mouth sore, cracked; nostrils dirty and sooty, 
dry. Constantly picking his lips, clothes, or boring into his nose 
with the finger (while perfectly conscious, Arum.). Boring head 
into pillow: rolling from side to side; beating head with hands. 
Diarrhoea: during acute hydrocephalus, dentition, pregnancy; 
watery; clear, tenacious, colorless, mucus; white, jelly-like mucus; 
like frog spawn; involuntary. Urine: red, black, scanty, coffee-
ground sediment; suppressed in brain troubles and dropsy; 
albuminous. Dropsy: of brain, chest, abdomen; after scarlatina, 
intermittents; with fever, debility, suppressed urine; from 
suppressed exanthemata (Apis, Zinc.).
Relations. - Compare: Apis, Apos., Ars., Bell., Bry., Dig., Lach., 
Sulph., Tab., Zinc. in brain or meningeal affections.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Helonias Dioica.
Unicorn Plant. (Melanthaceae.)
For women: with prolapsus from atony, enervated by indolence 
and luxury; worn out with hard work, mental or physical; 
overtaxed muscles burn and ache; so tired cannot sleep. Always 
better when occupied, when not thinking of the ailment (Cal. p., 
Oxal. ac.). Restless, must be continually moving about. Irritable, 
fault finding; cannot endure least contradiction or receive least 
suggestion (Anac.). Profound melancholy; deep, mental 
depression. Diabetes: first stages; urine profuse, clear saccharine; 
lips dry, stick together; great thirst; restlessness; emaciation; 
irritable and melancholy. Albuminuria: acute or chronic; during 
pregnancy, with great weakness, languor, drowsiness, unusually 
tired, yet knows no reason. Menses: too early, too profuse, from 
uterine atony in women enfeebled by loss of blood; when patients 
lose more blood than is made in intermenstrual period; breasts 
swollen, nipples painful and tender (Con., Lac c.). Flow passive, 
dark, clotted, offensive. Sensation of soreness and heaviness in 
pelvis (Lappa); a consciousness of a womb, feels it move when she 
moves, it is so sore and tender (Lys.). For the bad effects of 
abortions and miscarriages.
Relations. - Compare: Aletris, Fer., Lil., Phos. ac. Similar: to, 
Alet., in debility from prolapsus, protracted illness, defective 
nutrition.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Hepar Sulphuris.
Sulphuret of Lime (CaS)
For torpid lymphatic constitutions; persons with light hair and 
complexion, slow to act, muscles soft and flabby. The slightest 
injury causes suppression (Graph., Mer.). Diseases where the 
system has been injured by the abuse of Mercury. In diseases 
where suppuration seems inevitable, Hepar may open the abscess 
and hasten the cure. Oversensitive, physically and mentally; the 
slightest cause irritates him; quick, hasty speech and hasty 
drinking. Patient is peevish, angry at the least trifle; 
hypochondriacal; unreasonably anxious. Extremely sensitive to 
cold air, imagines he can feel the air if a door is open in the next 
room; must be wrapped up to the face even in hot weather (Psor.); 
cannot bear to be uncovered (Nux - cannot bear to be covered, 
Camp., Sec.); take cold from slightest exposure to fresh air (Tub.). 
Urine: flow impeded; voided slowly, without force, drops 
vertically; is obliged to wait a while before it passes; bladder weak, 
is unable to finish, seems as if some urine always remains (Alum., 
Sil.). Cough: when any part of the body is uncovered (Rhus); 
croupy, choking, strangling; from exposure to dry west wind, the 
land wind (Acon.). Asthma: breathing, anxious, wheezing, rattling; 
short, deep breathing, threatens suffocation; must bend head back 
and sit up; after suppressed eruption (Psor.). Croup: after exposure 
to dry cold wind (Acon.); deep, rough, barking cough, with 
hoarseness and rattling of mucus; < cold air, cold drinks, before 
mid-night or toward morning. Sensation of a splinter, fish bone or 
plug in the throat (Arg. n., Nit. ac.); quinsy, when suppuration 
threatens; chronic hypertrophy, with hardness of hearing (Bar., 
Lyc., Plumb., Psor.). The skin is very sensitive to touch, cannot 
bear even clothes to touch affected parts (Lach. - sensitive to 
slightest touch, but can bear hard pressure, Cinch.). Skin affections 
extremely sensitive to touch, the pain often causing fainting. 
Ulcers herpes surrounded by little pimples or pustules and spread 
by coalescing. Middle of lower lip cracked (Am. c., Nat. m. - 
cracks in commissures, Cund.). Eyeballs: sore to touch; pain as if 
they would be pulled back into head (Olean., Paris). Diarrhoea: of 
children with sour smell (Cal., Mag. c. - child and stool have a sour 
smell, Rheum); clay colored stool (Cal., Pod.). Sweats: profusely 
day and night without relief; perspiration sour, offensive; easily, on 
every mental or physical exertion (Psor., Sep.).
Relations. - Complementary: to, Calendula in injuries of soft parts. 
Hepar antidotes: bad effects of mercury and other metals, iodine, 
iodide of potash, cod-liver oil; renders patient less susceptable to 
atmospheric changes and cold air. Compare: The psoric skin 
affections of Sulphur are dry, itching, > by scratching, and not 
sensitive to touch; while in Hepar the skin is unhealthy, 
suppurating, moist, and extremely sensitive to touch.
Aggravation. - Lying on painful side (Kali c., Iod.); cold air; 
uncovering; eating or drinking cold things; touching affected parts; 
abuse of mercury.
Amelioration. - Warmth in general (Ars.); wrapping up warmly, 
especially the head (Psor., Sil.); in damp, wet weather (Caust., Nux 
- rev of, Nat. s.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Hyoscyamus Niger.
Henbane (Solanaceae.)
Persons of sanguine temperament; who are irritable, nervous, 
hysterical. Convulsions: of children, from fright or the irritation of 
intestinal worms (Cina); during labor; during the peurperal state; 
after meals, child vomits, sudden shriek, then insensible. Diseases 
with increased cerebral activity, but non-inflammatory in type; 
hysteria or delirium tremens; delirium, with resplessness, jumps 
out of bed, tries ot escape; makes irrelevant answers; thinks he is in 
the wrong place; talks of imaginary doings, but has no wants and 
makes no complaints. In delirium, Hyoscyamus occupies a place 
midway between Belladonna and Strammonium; lacks the constant 
cerebral congestion of the former and the fierce rage and maniacal 
delirium of the latter. Spasms: without conciousness, very restless; 
every muscle in the body twitches, from the eyes to the toes (with 
conciousness, Nux). Fears: being alone; poison; being bitten; being 
sold; to eat or drink; to take what is offered; suspicious, of some 
plot. Bad effects of unfortunate love; with jealousy, rage, 
incohorent speech or inclination to laugh at everything; often 
followed by epilepsy. Lascivious mania; immodesty, will not be 
covered, kicks off the clothes, exposes the person; sings obscene 
songs; lies naked in bed and chatters. Cough; dry, nocturnal, 
spasmodic; < when lying down, relieved when sitting up (Dros.); < 
at night, after eating, drinking, talking singing (Dros., Phos., - > 
when lying down,, Mang. m.). Intense sleeplessness of irritable,  
excitable persons form business embarrassments, often imaginary. 
Paralysis of bladder; after labor, with retention or incontinence of 
urine; no desire to urinate in lying-in women (Arn., Op.). Fever: 
pneumonia, scarlatina, rapidly becomes typhoid; sensorium 
clouded, staring eyes, gasping at flocks or picking bed clothes, 
teeth covered with sordes, tongue dry and unweildly; involuntary 
stool and urine; subsultus teninum.
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Stam., Verat. Phos. often cures 
lasciviousness when Hyos. fails. Nux or Opium in haemoptysis of 
drunkards. Follows: Bell. well in deafness after apoplexy.
Aggravation. - At night; during menses; mental affections; 
jealousy, unhappy love; when lying down.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Hypericum Perforatum.
St. Johns Wort (Hypericaceae)
Mechanical injuries of spinal cord; bad effects of spinal 
concussion; pains, after a fall on coccyx. Punctured, incised or 
lacerated wounds; sore, painful (Led. - contused wounds, Arn., 
Ham.), especially if of long duration. Injuries: from treading on 
nails, needles, pins, splinters (Led.); from rat-bites; prevents lock-
jaw. Preserves integrity of torn and lacerated members when 
almost entirely separated from body (Calend.). Injury to parts rich 
in sentient nerves - fingers, toes, matrices of nails, palms or soles 
- where the intolerable pains shows nerves are severely involved; 
of tissues of animal life, as hands and feet. Nervous depression 
following wounds or surgical operations; removes bad effects of 
shock, of fright, of mesmerism. Always modifies and sometimes 
arrests ulceration and sloughing (Calend.). Crushed, mashed 
finger-tips. Tetanus after traumatic injuries (compare, Phys.). 
Vertigo: sensation as if head became suddenly elongated; at night, 
with urging to urinate. Headache: after a fall upon occiput, with 
sensation as if being lifted up high into the air; great anxiety lest 
she fall from this height. Spine: after a fall; slightest motion of 
arms or neck extorts cries; spine very sensitive to touch. Bunions 
and corns when pain is excruciating, showing nerve involvement. 
Convulsions; after blows on head or concussion.
Relations. - Compare: Arn., Calen., Ruta, Staph. In wounds where 
formerly Acon., and Arn., were given alternately, Hypericum 
cures.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ignatia.
St. Ignatius Bean. (Loganiaceae)
Especially suited to nervous temperament; women of a sensitive, 
easily excited nature; dark hair and skin but mild disposition, quick 
to percieve, rapid in execution. In striking contrast with the fair 
complexion, yielding, lachrymose, but slow and indecisive, 
Pulsatilla. The remedy of great contradictions: the roaring in ears > 
by music; the piles > when walking; sore throat feels > when 
swallowing; empty feeling in stomach not > by eating; cough < the 
more he coughs; cough on standing still during a walk (Ast. fl.); 
spasmodic laughter from grief; sexual desire with impotency; 
thirst during a chill, no thirst during the fever; the color changes in 
the face when at rest. Mental conditions rapidly, in an almost 
incredibly short time, change from joy to sorrow, from laughing to 
weeping (Coff., Croc., Nux m.); moody. Persons mentally and 
physically exhausted by long-concentrated grief. Involuntary  
sighing (Lach.); with a weak, empty feeling at pit of stomach; not 
> by eating (Hydr., Sep.). Bad effects of anger, grief, or 
disappointed love (Cal. p., Hyos.); broods in solitude over 
imaginary trouble. Desire to be alone. Finely sensitive mood, 
delicate consciousness. Inconstant, impatient, irresolute, 
quarrelsome. Amiable in disposition if feeling well, but easily 
disturbed by very slight emotion; easily offended. The slightest 
fault finding or contradiction excites anger, and this makes him 
angry with himself. Children, when reprimanded, scolded, or sent 
ot bed, get sick or have convulsions in sleep. Ill effects, from bad 
news; from vexation with reserved displeasure; from suppressed 
mental sufferings; of shame and mortification (Staph.). Headache, 
as if a nail was driven out through the side, relieved by lying on it. 
(Coff., Nux, Thuja). Cannot bear tabacco; smoking, or being in 
tabacco smoke, produces or aggravates headache. In talking or 
chewing, bites inside of cheek. Sweat on the face on a small spot 
only while eating. Oversensitiveness to pain (Coff., Cham.). 
Constipation; from carriage riding; of a paralytic origin; with 
excessive urging, felt more in upper abdomen (Ver.); with great 
pain, dreads to go to the closet; in women who are habitual coffee 
drinkers. Prolapsus ani from moderate straining at stool, stooping 
or lifting (Nit. ac., Pod., Ruta); < when the stool is loose. 
Haemorrhoids: prolapse with every stool, have to be replaced; 
sharp stitches shoot up the rectum (Nit. a.); < for hours after stool 
(Rat., Sulph.). Twitchings, jerkings, even spasms of single limbs or 
whole body, when falling asleep. Pain in small, circumscribed 
spots. Fever: red face during chill (Fer.); chill, with thirst during 
chill only; > by external heat; heat without thirst, < by covering ( > 
by covering, Nux). Complaints return at precisely the same hour. 
Ignatia bears the same relation to the diseases of women that Nux 
does to sanguine, bilious men. There are many more Ignatia 
persons in North America than Nux vomica persons - Hering.
Relations. - Incompatible: Coff., Nux, Tab. The bad effects of Ign. 
are antidoted by Puls.
Aggravation. - From tabacco, coffee, brandy contact, motion, 
strong odors, mental emotions, grief.
Amelioration. - Warmth, hard pressure (Cinch.); swallowing; 
walking.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Iodum.
Iodine. (The Element)
Persons of scrofulous diathesis, with dark or black hair and eyes; a 
low cachetic condition, with profound debility and great 
emaciation (Abrot.). Great weakness and loss of breath on going 
upstairs (Calc.); during menses (Alum, Carbo an., Coc.). Ravenous 
hunger; eats freely and well, yet loses flesh all the time (Abrot., 
Nat. m., Sanic., Tub.). Empty eructations from morning to nigh, as 
if every particle of food was turned into air (Kali c.). Suffers from 
hunger, must eat every few hours; anxious and worried if he does 
not eat (Cina, Sulph.); feels > while eating or after eating, when 
stomach is full. Itching: low down in the lungs, behind the 
sternum, causing cough; extends through bronchi to nasal cavity 
(Coc. c., Con., Phos.). Hypertrophy and induration of glandular 
tissue - thyroid, mammae, ovaries, testes, uterus, prostate or other 
glands - breasts may dwindle and become flabby. Hard goitre, in 
dark haired persons (light haired, Brom.); feels > after eating. 
Palpitation, worse from least exertion (compare, Dig.- from least 
mental exertion, Cal. ars.). Sensation as if the heart was squeezed 
together; as if grasped with an iron hand (Cac., Sulph.). 
Leucorrhoea: acrid, corrosive, staining and corroding the linen; 
most abundant at time of menses. Cancerous degeneration of the 
cervix; cutting pains in abdomen and haemorrhage at every stool. 
Constipation, with ineffectual urging > by drinking cold milk. 
Croup: membranous, hoarse, dry cough, worse in warm, wet 
weather; with wheezing and sawing respiration (Spong.). Child 
grasps at larynx (Cepa); face pale and cold, especially in fleshy 
children.
Relations. - Complementary: to, Lycopodium. Compare: Acet. ac., 
Brom., Con., Kali bi., Spong. in membranous croup and croupy 
affections; especially in overgrown boys with scrofulous diathesis. 
Follows well: after, Hep., Mer.; is followed by Kali bi. in croup. 
Acts best in goitre when give after full moon, or when moon is 
waning - Lippe. Should not be given during lying-in period, except 
in high potencies- Hering.
Aggravation. - Warmth; wrapping up the head (reverse of, Hep., 
Psor.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ipecacuanha.
Ipecac. (Rubiaceae.)
Adapted to cases where the gastric symptoms predominate (Ant. c., 
Puls.); tongue clean or slightly coated. In all diseases with 
constant and continual nausea. Nausea: with profuse saliva; 
vomiting of white, glairy mucus in large quantities, without relief; 
sleepy afterwards; worse from stooping; the primary effects of 
tobacco; of pregnancy. Stomach: feels relaxed, as if hanging down 
(Ign., Staph.); clutching, squeezing, griping, as from a hand, each 
finger sharply pressing into intestines; worse from motion. 
Flatulent, cutting colic about umbilicus. Stool: grassy-green; of 
white mucus (Colch.); bloody; fermented, foamy, slimy, like frothy 
molasses. Autumnal dysentry; cold nights, after hot days (Colch., 
Merc.). Asiatic cholera, first symptoms, where nausea and 
vomiting predominate (Colch.). Haemorrhage: active or passive, 
bright-red from all the orifices of the body (Erig., Mill.); uterine, 
profuse, clotted; heavy, oppressed breathing during; stitches from 
navel to uterus. Cutting pains across abdomen from left to right 
(Lach., - from right to left, Lyc.). Cough: dry spasmodic, 
constricted, asthmatic. Difficult breathing from least exercise; 
violent dyspnoea, with wheezing and anxiety about the stomach. 
Whooping-cough: child loses breath, turns pale, stiff and blue; 
strangling, with gagging and vomiting of mucus; bleeding from 
nose or mouth (Indigo). Cough, with rattling of mucus in bronchi 
when inspiring (Ant. t.); threatened suffocation from mucus. Pains  
as if bones were all torn to pieces (as if broken, Eup.). Intermittent 
fever: in beginning of irregular cases; with nausea, or from gastric 
disturbance; after abuse of, or suppression from quinine. 
Intermittent dyspepsia, every other day at same hour; fever, with 
persistent nausea. Oversensitive to heat and cold.
Relations. - Complementary: Cuprum. Is followed well: by, Ars. 
in influenza, chills, croup, debility, cholera infantum; by Ant. t., in 
foreign bodies in larynx. Similar: to, Puls., Ant. c., in gastric 
troubles.
Aggravation. - Winter and dry weather; warm, moist, south winds 
(Euph.); slightest motion.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Kali Bichromicum.
Potassium Bichromate. (K2Cr2O7)
Fat, light-haired persons who suffer from catarrhal, syphillitic or 
psoric affections. Fat, chubby, short-necked children disposed to 
croup and croupy affections. Affections of the mucous membranes 
- eyes, nose, mouth, throat, bronchi, gastro-intestinal and genito-
urinary tracts - discharge of a tough, stringy mucus which 
adheres to the parts and can be drawn into long strings 
(compare Hyd., Lys.). Complaints occurring in hot weather. 
Liability to take cold in open air. Rheumatism alternating with 
gastric symptoms, one appearing in the fall and the other in the 
spring; rheumatism and dysentery alternate (Abrot.). Pains: in  
small spots, can be covered with point of finger (Ign.); shift  
rapidly from one part to another (Kali s., Lac c., Puls.); appear and 
disappear suddenly (Bell., Ign., Mag. p.). Neuralgia every day at 
same hour (Chin. s.). Gastric complaints: bad effects of beer; loss 
of appetite; weight in pit of stomach; flatulence; < soon after 
eating; vomiting of ropy mucus and blood; round ulcer of stomach 
(Gym.). Nose: pressive pain in root of nose (in forehead and root  
of nose, Stict.); discharge of plugs, "clinkers;" tough, ropy, green 
fluid mucus; in clear masses, and has violent pain from occiput to 
forehead if discharge eases. Ulceration of septum, with bloody 
discharge or large flakes of hard mucus (Alum., Sep., Teuc.). 
Diphtheria: pseudo-membranous deposit, firm, pearly, fibrinous, 
prone to extend downwards to larynx and trachea (Lac c. - reverse 
of, Brom.). Oedematous, bladder-like appearance of uvula; much 
swelling, but little redness (Rhus). Cough: violent, rattling, with 
gagging from viscid mucus in the throat; < when undressing 
(Hep.). Croup: hoarse, metallic, with expectoration of tough mucus 
or fibro-elastic casts in morning on awakening; with dyspnoea, > 
by lying down (worse when lying down, Aral., Lach.). Deep-eating 
ulcers in fauces; often syphilitic. Headache: blurred vision or  
blindness precedes the attack (Gels., Lac d.); must lie down; 
aversion to light and noise; sight returns as headache increases 
(Iris, Nat., Lac d.). Prolapsus uteri, seemingly in hot weather. 
Sexual desire absent in fleshy people.
Relations. - Compare: Brom., Hep. Iod. in croupy affections. 
After: Canth. or Carb. ac. has removed the scrapings, in dysentery. 
After: Iod. in croup, when hoarse cough, with touch membrane, 
general weakness and coldness are present; Cal. in acute or chronic 
nasal catarrh. Ant. t. follows well in catarrhal affections and skin 
diseases.
Aggravation. - Heat of summer; hot weather.
Amelioration. - Skin symptoms are better in cold weather (reverse 
of, Alum. and Pet.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Kali Bromatum.
Potassium Bromide. (KBr)
Adapted to large persons inclined to obesity; acts better in children 
than in adults. Loss of sensibility, fauces, larynx, urethra, entire 
body; staggering, uncertain gait; feels as if legs were all over 
sidewalk. Nervous, restless; cannot sit still, must move about or 
keep occupied; hands and fingers in constant motion; fidgety  
hands (fidgety feet, Zinc.); twitching of fingers. Fits of 
uncontrollable weeping and profound melancholic delusions. Loss 
of memory; forgets how to talk; absent-minded; has to be told the 
word before he could speak it (Anac.). Depressed, low-spirited, 
anxious, "feel as if they would lose their minds." Inco-ordination 
of muscles (Gels.); nervous weakness or paralysis of motion and 
numbness. Restlessness and sleeplessness due to worry and grief, 
loss of property or reputation, from business embarassements 
(Hyos.). Night terrors of children (Kali p.); grinding teeth in sleep, 
screams, moans, cries; horrible dreams, cannot be comforted by 
friends. Somnambulism (Sil.). Spasms: from fright, anger or 
emotional causes in nervous plethoric persons; during parturition, 
teething, whooping-cough, Bright's disease. Epilepsy: congenital, 
syphilitic, tubercular; usually a day or two before menses; at new 
moon; headache follows attack. Cholera infantum, with reflex 
irritation of brain, before effusion; first stage of hydrocephaloid. 
Daily colic in infants about 5 a. m. (at 4 p. m. Col., Lyc.). Nervous 
cough during pregnancy; dry, hard, almost incessant, threatening 
abortion (Con.). Stammering; slow, difficult speech (Bov., Stram.). 
Acne: simplex, indurata, rosacea; bluish-red, pustular, on face, 
chest, shoulders; leaves unsightly scars (Carbo an.); in young 
fleshy persons of gross habits.
Relations. - One of the antidotes for lead poisoning. Often curative 
after Eugenia jambos in acne.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Kali Carbonicum.
Potassium Carbonate (K2OCO2)
For diseases of old people, dropsy and paralysis; with dark hair, 
lax fibre, inclined to obesity (Am. c., Graph.). After loss of fluids 
or vitality, particularly in anaemic (Cinch., Phos. ac., Phos., Psor.). 
Pains, stitching, darting, worse during rest and lying on affected  
side (stitching, darting, better during rest and lying on painful side, 
Bry.). Cannot bear to be touched; starts when touched ever so 
lightly, especially on the feet. Great aversion to being alone (Ars., 
Bis., Lyc. - desires to be alone, Ign., Nux). Bag-like swellings 
between the upper eyelids and eyebrows. Weak eyes; after  
coition, pollution, abortion, measles. Stomach: distended, 
sensitive; feels as if it would burst; excessive flatulency, 
everything she eats or drinks appears to be converted to gas (Iod.)
[Lyc.]. Nosebleed when washing the face in the morning (Am. c., 
Arn.). Toothache only when eating; throbbing; < when touched by 
anything warm or cold. Backache, sweating, weakness; after 
abortion, labor, metrorrhage; when eating; while walking feels as if 
she must give up and lie down. Cough: dry, paroxsymal, loosens 
viscid mucus or pus which must be swallowed; spasmodic with 
gagging or vomiting of ingesta; hard, white or smoky masses fly 
from throat when coughing (Bad., Chel.). Feels badly, week 
before menstruation; backache, before and during menses. Labor 
pains insufficient; violent backache; wants the back pressed 
(Caust.). Asthma, relieved when sitting up or bending forward or 
by rocking; worse from 2 to 4 a. m. Persons suffering from 
ulceration of the lungs can scarcely get well without this anti-
psoric - Hahnemann. Difficult swallowing; sticking pain in 
pharynx as of a fish-bone (Hep., Nit. ac.); food easily gets into the 
windpipe; pain in back when swallowing. Constipation: stool large, 
difficult, with stitching, colic pains an hour or two before. Heart: 
tendency to fatty degeneration (Phos.); as if suspended by a thread 
(Lach.). Very much inclined to take cold.
Relations. - Complementary: Carbo veg. Follows well: after, Kali 
s., Phos., Stan. in loose rattling cough. Will bring on the menses 
when Nat. m. though apparently indicated, fails - Hahnemann.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Kalmia Latifolia.
Mountain Laurel. (Ericaceae.)
Adapted to acute neuralgia, rheumatism, gouty complaints, 
especially when heart is involved as a sequel of rheumatism or 
gout. In heart diseases that have developed from rheumatism, or 
alternate with it. Pains sticking, darting, pressing, shooting in a 
downward direction (Cac. - upward, Led.); attended or succeeded 
by numbness of affected part (Acon., Cham., Plat.). Severe 
stitching pain in right eye and orbit (left eye, Spig.); stiffness in 
muscles, pain < when turning the eyes (Spig.); begins at sunrise, < 
at noon and leaves at sunset (Nat. m.). Rheumatism: pains intense, 
change places suddenly going from joint to joint; joint hot, red, 
swollen; worse from least movement. Vertigo when stooping or 
looking down (Spig.). Pulse slow, scarcely perceptible (35 to 40 
per minute); pale face and cold extremities.
Relations. - Similar: to, Led., Rhod., Spig., in rheumatic affections 
and gout. It follows Spig. well in heart disease.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Kreosotum.
Kreosotum. (A Distillation of Wood Tar.)
Dark complexion, slight, lean, ill-developed, poorly nourished, 
overgrown; very tall for her age (Phos.). Children: old looking,  
wrinkled (Abrot.); scrofulous or psoric affections; rapid emaciation 
(Iod.); post climacteric diseases of women (Lach.). Haemorrhagic 
diathesis; small wounds bleed freely (Crot., Lach., Phos.); flow 
passive, in epistaxis, haemoptysis, haematuria; in typhoid, 
followed by great prostration; dark, oozing, after the extraction of a 
tooth (Ham.). Roaring and humming in ears, with deafness, before 
and during menses. Corrosive, fetid, ichorous discharges from 
mucous membranes; vitality greatly depressed. Itching, so violent 
toward evening as to drive one almost wild (itching, without 
eruption, Dolichos). Painful dentition; teeth begin to decay as soon 
as they appear; gums bluish-red, soft, spongy, bleeding, inflamed, 
scorbutic, ulcerated. Vomiting: of pregnancy, sweetish water with 
ptyalism; of cholera, during painful dentition; incessant with 
cadaverous stool; in malignant affections of stomach. Severe 
headache before and during menses (Sep.). Menses: too early, 
profuse, protracted; pain during, but < after it; flow on lying down, 
cease on sitting or walking about; cold drinks relieve menstrual 
pains; flow intermits; at times almost ceasing, then commencing 
again (Sulph.). Incontinence of urine; can only urinate when lying; 
copious, pale; urging, cannot get out of bed quick enough (Apis, 
Petros.); during first sleep (Sep.), from which child is roused with 
difficulty. Smarting and burning during and after micturition 
(Sulph.). Leucorrhoea: acrid, corrosive, offensive; worse between 
periods (Bov., Bor.); has the odor of green corn; stiffens like 
starch, stains the linen yellow. Lochia: dark, brown, lumpy, 
offensive, acrid; almost ceases then freshens up again (Con., 
Sulph.). Violent corrosive itching of pudenda and vagina.
Relations. - Kreosote is followed well by Ars., Phos., Sulph., in 
cancer and disease of a malignant tendency. Carbo veg. and 
Kreosote are inimical.
Aggravation. - In the open air; cold weather; when growing cold; 
from washing or bathing with cold water; rest, especially when 
lying.
Amelioration. - Generally better from warmth.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lachesis.
Surukuku Snake Poison. (Ophidia.)
Persons of a melancholy temperament, dark eyes, and a disposition 
to low spirits and indolence. Women of choleric temperament, 
with freckles and red hair (Phos.). Better adapted to thin and 
emaciated than to fleshy persons; to those who have been changed, 
both mentally and physically, by their illness. Climacteric 
ailments: haemorrhoids haemorrhages; hot flushes and hot  
perspiration; burning vertex headache, especially at or after the 
menopause (Sang., Sulph.). Ailments from long lasting grief; 
sorrow, fright, vexation, jealousy or disappointed love (Aur., Ign., 
Phos. ac.). Women who have not recovered from the change of 
life, "have never felt well since that time.". Left side principally  
affected; diseases begin on the left and go the right side - left 
ovary, testicle, chest. Great sensitiveness to touch; throat, 
stomach, abdomen; cannot bear bed-clothes or night-dress to touch 
throat or abdomen, no because sore or tender, as in Apis or Bell., 
but clothes cause an uneasiness, make her nervous. Intolerance of 
tight bands about neck or waist. Extremes of heat and cold cause 
great debility. Drunkards with congestive headaches and 
haemorrhoids; prone to erysipelas or apoplexy. Headache: pressing 
or bursting pain in temples < from motion, pressure, stooping, 
lying, after sleep; dreads to go to sleep because she awakens with 
such a headache. Rush of blood to head; after alcohol; mental 
emotions; suppressed or irregular menses; at climaxis; left-sided 
apoplexy. Weight and pressure on vertex (Sep.); like lead, in 
occiput. All symptoms, especially the mental, worse after sleep, or  
the aggravation wakes him from sleep; sleeps into the 
aggravation; unhappy, distressed, anxious, sad < in morning on 
waking. Mental excitability; ecstacy, with almost prophetic 
perceptions; with a vivid imagination; great loquacity; (Agar., 
Stram.); want to talk all the time; jumps from one idea to another; 
one word often leads into another story. Constipation: inactivity, 
stools lies in rectum, without urging; sensation of constriction of  
sphincter (Caust., Nit. ac.). Menses at regular time; too short, 
scanty, feeble; pains all relieved by the flow; always better during 
menses (Zinc.). Piles: with scanty menses; at climaxis; 
strangulated; with stitches shooting upward (Nit. ac.). The least 
thing coming near mouth or nose interferes with breathing; wants 
to be fanned, but slowly and at a distance (rapidly, Carbo v.). As 
soon as he falls asleep the breathing stops (Am. c., Grind., Lac c., 
Op.). Great physical and mental exhaustion; trembling in whole 
body, would constantly sink down from weakness; worse in the 
morning (Sulph., Tub.). Epilepsy; comes during sleep (Bufo); from 
loss of vital fluids; onanism, jealousy. Haemorrhagic diathesis; 
small wounds bleed easily and profusely (Crot., Kreos., Phos.); 
blood dark, non-coagulable (Crot., Sec.). Boils, carbuncles, ulcers 
and intense pain (Tar.); malignant pustules; decubitus; dark,  
bluish, purple appearance; tend to malignancy. Bad effects of 
poison wounds; post-mortem (Pyr.). Sensation as of a ball rolling 
in the bladder. Fever annually returning; paroxysm every spring 
(Carbo v., Sulph.), after suppression by quinine the previous 
autumn. Fever: typhoid, typhus; stupor or muttering delirium, 
sunken countenance, falling of lower jaw; tongue dry, black, 
trembles, is protruded with difficulty or catches on the teeth when 
protruding; conjunctiva yellow or orange color; perspiration cold, 
stains yellow, bloody (Lyc.). Diphtheria and tonsillitis, beginning  
on the left and extending to right side (Lac. c., Sabad.); dark purple 
appearance (Naja); < by hot drinks, after sleep; liquids more 
painful than solids when swallowing (Bell., Bry., Ign.); prostration 
out of all proportion to appearance of throat.
Relations. - Complementary: Hep., Lyc., Nit. ac. Incompatible: 
Acet. ac., Carb. ac. [Psor.]. In intermittent fever Nat. m. follows 
Lach. well when type changes.
Aggravation. - After sleep; contact; extremes of temperature; 
acids; alcohol; cinchona; mercury; pressure or constriction; sun's 
rays; spring. summer.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lac Caninum.
Dogs (Milk.)
For nervous, restless, highly sensitive organisms. Symptoms 
erratic, pains constantly flying from one part to another (Kali bi., 
Puls.); changing from side to side every few hours or days. Very 
forgetful, absent-minded; makes purchases and walks away 
without them (Agnus, Anac., Caust., Nat.). In writing, uses too 
many words or not the right ones; omits final letter or letters in a 
word; cannot concentrate the mind to read or study; very nervous 
(Bov., Graph., Lach., Nat. c., Sep.). Despondent, hopeless; thinks 
her disease incurable; has not a friend living; nothing worth living 
for; could weep at any moment (Act., Aur., Cal., Lach.). Cross, 
irritable; child cries and screams all the time, especially at night 
(Jal., Nux, Psor.). Fears to be alone (Kali c.); of dying (Ars.); of 
becoming insane (Lil.); of falling down stairs (Bor.). Chronic 
"blue" condition; everything seems so dark that it can grow no 
darker (Lyc., Puls.). Attacks of rage, cursing and swearing at 
slightest provocation (Lil., Nit. ac.); intense ugliness; hateful. 
Coryza, with discharge of thick, white mucus. One nostril stuffed 
up, the other free and discharging; there conditions alternate; 
discharge acrid, nose and lip raw (Arum, Cepa). Diphtheria and 
tonsilitis; symptoms change repeatedly from side to side. Sore 
throats and cough are apt to begin and end with menstruation; 
yellow or white patches; pains shoot to ear. Throat: sensitive to 
touch externally (Lach.); < by empty swallowing (Ign.); constant 
inclination to swallow, painful, almost impossible (Mer.); pains 
extend to ears (Hep., Kali bi.); begins on left side (Lach.). Shining, 
glazed appearance of diphtheritic deposit, chancres and ulcers. 
Very hungry, cannot eat enough to satisfy; as hungry after eating 
as before (Casc., Cal., Cina, Lyc., Stront.). Sinking in epigastrium; 
faintness in stomach. Menses; too early; too profuse; flow in 
gushes bright red, viscid and stringy (dark, black, stringy, Croc.); 
breasts swollen, painful, sensitive before and during (Con.). 
Discharge of flatus from vagina (Brom., Lyc., Nux m., Sang.). 
Breasts: inflamed, painful; < by least jar and towards evening; 
must hold them firmly when going up or down stairs (Bry.). 
Serviceable in almost all cases when it is required to dry up milk 
(Asaf.- to bring back or increase it, Lac d.). Sensation as if breath 
would leave her when lying down; must get up and walk (Am. c., 
Grind., Lach.). Loss of milk while nursing, without any known 
cause (Asaf.). Palpitation violent when lying on left side > turning 
on right (Tab.). Sexual organs easily excited, from touch, pressure 
on sitting, or friction by walking (Cinn., Coff., Mur., Plat.). When 
walking, seems to be walking on air; when lying, does not seem to 
touch the bed (Asar.). Backache: intense, unbearable, cross super-
sacral region, extending to right natis and right sciatic nerve; < by 
rest and on first moving (Rhus); spine aches from base of brain to 
coccyx, very sensitive to touch or pressure (Chin. s., Phos., Zinc.).
Relations. - Similar: to, Apis, Con., Murex, Lach., Kali bi., Puls., 
Sep., Sulph. It generally acts best in single dose. Probably no 
remedy in the Materia Medica presents a more valuable 
pathogenesis in symptoms of the throat, or one that will better 
repay a careful study. Like Lachesis, this remedy has met with the 
most violent opposition from prejudice and ignorance, which its 
wonderful theraputic powers have slowly, yet surely overcome. It 
was successfully used by Dioscorides, Pliny, and Sextus in ancient 
times, and revived in New York by Reisig, Bayard and Swan in the 
treatment of diphtheria. Reised was the first to potentize it.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lac Defloratum.
Skimmed Milk.
The successful treatment of Diabetes and Bright's Disease with 
skim milk, by Donkin, was the hint which led Dr. Swan to 
potentize and prove it. Every symptom given has been verified in 
the cure of the sick. Diseases with faulty and defective nutrition 
with reflex affections of nervous centers. Despondent; does not 
care to live; has no fear of death but is sure he is going to die. 
American sick headache: begins in forehead, extending to occiput, 
in morning on rising (Bry.); intense throbbing, with nausea, 
vomiting, blindness and obstinate constipation (Epig., Iris, Sang.); 
< noise, light, motion (Mag. m., Sil.); during menses (Kreos., 
Sep.); great prostration; > pressure, by bandaging head tightly 
(Arg. n., Puls.); copious, pale urine. Globus hystericus; sensation 
of a large ball rising from stomach to throat, causing sense of 
suffocation (Asaf., Kal.). Vomiting; incessant, no relation to 
eating; first of undigested food, intensely acid, then of bitter water; 
of pregnancy (Lac. ac., Psor.). Constipation: with ineffectual 
urging (Anac., Nux); faeces dry and hard (Bry., Sulph.); stool 
large, hard, great straining, lacerating anus; painful, extorting cries. 
A woman had taken 10 to 12 enemas daily, often passed 4 or 5 
weeks without an evacuation, constipation of 15 years standing. 
Menses: delayed; suppressed, by putting hands in cold water 
(Con.); drinking a glass of milk will promptly suppress flow until 
next period (compare Phos.). Great restlessness, extreme and 
protracted suffering from loss of sleep (Coc., Nit. ac.). Feels 
completely exhausted, whether she does anything or not; great 
fatigue when walking. Sensation: as if cold air was blowing on her, 
even while covered up; as if sheets were damp. Dropsy: from 
organic heart disease; from chronic liver complaint; far advanced 
albuminuria; following intermittent fever; Obesity; fatty 
degeneration.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ledum Palustre.
Marsh Tea. (Ericaceae.)
Adapted to the rheumatic, gouty diathesis; constitutions abused by 
alcohol (Colch.). Haemorrhage into anterior chamber after 
iridectomy. Contusions of eye and lids, especially if much 
extravasation of blood; ecchymosis of lids and conjunctiva. 
Rheumatism or gout; begins in lower limbs and ascends (descends, 
Kal.); especially if brought to a low asthenic condition by abuse of 
Colchicum; joints become the seat of nodosities and "gout stones." 
which are painful; acute and chronic arthiritis. Affects left shoulder 
and right hip-joint (Agar., Ant. t., Stram.). Emaciation of affected 
parts (Graph.). Pains are sticking, tearing, throbbing; rheumatic 
pains are < by motion; < at night, by warmth of bed and bed-
covering (Mer.); > only when holding feet in ice-water (Sec.). 
Complaints of people who are cold all the time; always feel cold 
and chilly; lack of animal or vital heat (Sep., Sil.); the wounded 
parts especially are cold to touch. Parts cold to touch, but not cold 
subjectively to patient. In some affections, warmth of bed 
intolerable on account of heat and burning of limbs. Swelling: of 
feet, up to knees; of ankle with unbearable pain when walking, as 
from a sprain or false step; ball of great toe swollen, painful; in 
heels as if bruised. Intense itching of feet and ankles; < from 
scratching and warmth of bed (Puls., Rhus). Easy spraining of 
ankles and feet (Carbo an.). Punctured wounds by sharp pointed 
instruments, as awls, nails (Hyper.); rat bites, stings of insects, 
especially mosquitoes. Red pimples or tubercules on forehead and 
cheeks, as in brandy drinkers, stinging when touched. Long-
remaining discoloration after injuries: "black and blue" places 
become green.
Relations. - Compare: Arn., Crot. t., Ham., Bellis, Ruta, in 
traumatism; Con., in long-lasting effects of injuries.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lilium Tigrinum.
Tiger Lily. (Liliaceae.)
Affects principally the left side of the body (Lach., Thuja). 
Tormented about her salvation (Lyc., Sulph., Ver.), with ovarian or 
uterine complaints; consolation <. Wild, crazy feeling on vertex; 
confused ideas. Profound depression of spirits; can hardly avoid 
weeping; is very timid, fearful and weeps much; indifferent about 
what is being done for her. Anxious: about the disease; fears the 
symptoms indicate an organic affection; marked in both sexes. 
Disposed to curse, strike, to think obscene things (Anac., Lac c.); 
alternates with uterine irritation. Listless, yet cannot sit still; 
restless, yet does not want to walk; must keep busy to repress  
sexual desire. Desire to do something, hurried manner, yet has no 
ambition; aimless, hurried motion (Arg. n.). Fears: being alone, 
insanity, heart disease; fears she is incurable; some impending 
calamity or disease. Headaches and mental ailments depending on 
uterine irritation or displacement. Menstrual irregularities and 
irritable heart. Cannot walk on uneven ground; Pains in small 
spots; constantly shifting (Kali bi.). Frequent urging to urinate; if 
desire is not attended to, sensation of congestion in chest. Bearing-
down sensation; in abdomen and pelvis, as though all organs 
would escape (Lac. c., Murex, Sep.); < supporting vulval with 
hand; with palpitation. Menses: early, scanty, dark, offensive; flow 
only when moving about; cease to flow when she ceases to walk 
(Caust. - on lying down, Kreos., Mag. c.). Sensation as if heart was 
grasped in a vise (Cac.); as if blood had all gone to the heart; feels 
full to bursting; inability to walk erect. Pulsations over whole 
body, and full, distented feeling as if blood would burst through 
the vessel (Aesc.). Palpitation, fluttering; faint, hurried, anxious 
sensation about apex; sharp pain in left chest awakens at night; 
irregular pulse; extremities cold and covered with cold sweat; < 
after eating, lying on either side (on left side, Lach.). Rapid heart-
beat, 150 to 170 per minute. Constant desire to defecate and 
urinate (with prolapsus), from pressure in rectum. Weak and atonic 
condition of ovaries, uterus and pelvic tissues, resulting in 
anteversion, retroversion, sub-involution (Helon., Sep.); slow 
recovery after labor; nearly always with constipation, from 
inactivity.
Relations. - Compare: Act., Agar., Cac., Helon.,
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lobelia Inflata.
Indian Tobacco. (Lobeliaceae.)
Best adapted to persons of light hair, blue eyes, fair complexion, 
inclined to be fleshy. Gastric derangements, extreme nausea and 
vomiting; morning sickness; spasmodic asthma; pertusis, with 
dyspnoea threatening suffocation. Headache: gastric, with nausea, 
vomiting and great prostration; following intoxication; < afternoon 
until midnight; sudden pallor with profuse sweat (Tab.); < by 
tobacco or tobacco smoke. Vomiting: face bathed with cold sweat; 
of pregnancy, profuse salivation (Lac. ac. - at night, Mer.); 
chronic with good appetite, with nausea, profuse sweat and 
marked prostration. Faintness, weakness and an indescribable 
feeling at epigastrium, from excessive use of tea or tobacco. Urine: 
of a deep orange red color; copious red sediment. Dyspnoea: from 
constriction of middle of chest; < with every labor pain, seems to 
neutralize the pains; < by exposure to cold or slightest exertion, 
going up or down stairs (Ipec.). Sensation of congestion, pressure 
or weight in chest as if blood from extremities was filling it, > by 
rapid walking. Sensation as if heart would stand still; deep seated 
pain at base (at apex, Lil.). Sacrum: extreme sensitiveness; cannot  
bear the slightest touch, even of a soft pillow; sits leaning forward 
to avoid contact with clothes.
Relations. - Compare: Ant. t., Ars., Ipec., Tab., Ver.
Aggravation. - Slightest motion; touch, cold.
Amelioration. - Chest pain by walking rapidly. For the bad effects 
of drunkenness in people with light hair, blue or grey eyes, florid 
complexion, corpulent, Lobelia bears the same relation that Nux 
vomica does to persons of the opposite temperament.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lycopodium Clavatum.
Wolf's Foot; Club Moss (Lycopodiaceae)
For persons intellectually keen, but physically weak; upper part of 
body emaciated, lower part semi-dropsical; predisposed to lung 
and hepatic affections (Cal., Phos., Sulph.); especially the extremes 
of life, children and old people. Deep-seated, progressive, chronic 
diseases. Pains: aching-pressure, drawing; chiefly right sided, < 
four to eight P.M. Affects right side, or pain goes from right to  
left; throat, chest, abdomen, liver, ovaries. Children, weak, 
emaciated; with well-developed head but puny, sickly bodies. 
Baby cries all day, sleeps all night (rev. of, Jal., Psor.). Ailments 
from fright, anger, mortification, or vexation with reserved 
displeasure (Staph.). Avaricious, greedy, miserly, malacious, 
pusillanimous. Irritable; peevish and cross on walking; ugly, kick 
and scream; easily angered; cannot endure opposition or 
contradiction; seeks disputes; is beside himself. Weeps all day, 
cannot calm herself; very sensitive, even cries when thanked. 
Dread of men; of solitude, irritable and melancholy; fear of being 
alone (Bis., Kali c., Lil.). Complexion pale, dirty; unhealthy; 
sallow, with deep furrows, looks older than he is; fan-like motion  
of the alae nasi (Ant. t.). Catarrh: dry, nose stopped at night, must 
breathe through the mouth (Am. c., Nux, Samb.); snuffles, child 
starts from sleep rubbing its nose; of root of nose and frontal 
sinuses; crusts and elastic plugs (Kali bi., Marum). Diphtheria; 
fauces brownish red, deposit spreads from right tonsil to left, or 
descends from nose to right tonsil; < after sleep and from cold 
drinks (from warm drinks, Lach.). Everything tastes sour; 
eructations, heartburn, waterbrash, sour vomiting (between chill 
and heat). Canine hunger; the more he eats, the more he craves; 
head aches if does not eat. Gastric affections; excessive 
accumulation of flatulence; constant sensation of satiety; good 
appetite, but a few mouthfuls fill up to the throat, and he feels  
bloated; fermentation in abdomen, with loud grumbling, croaking, 
especially lower abdomen (upper abdomen, Carbo v. - entire 
abdomen, Cinch.); fulness not relieved by belching (Cinch.). 
Constipation: since puberty; since last confinement; when away 
from home; of infants; with ineffectual urging, rectum contracts 
and protrudes during stool, developing piles. Red sand in urine, 
on child's diaper (Phos.); child cries before urinating (Bor.); pain 
in back, relieved by urinating; renal colic, right side (left side, 
Berb.). Impotence: of young men, from onanism or sexual excess; 
penis small, cold, relaxed; old men, with strong desire but  
imperfect erections; falls asleep during embrace; premature 
emissions. Dryness of vagina; burning in, during and after coition 
(Lys.); physometra. Discharge of blood from genitals during every 
stool. Foetus appears to be turning somersaults. Hernia: right sided, 
has cured many cases especially in children. Pneumonia; neglected 
or maltreated, base of right lung involved especially; to hasten 
absorption or expectoration. Cough deep, hollow, even raising 
mucus in large quantities affords little relief. One foot hot and the 
other cold (Cinch., Dig., Ipec.). Waking at night feeling hungry 
(Cina., Psor.).
Relations. - Complementary: Iodine. Bad effects: of onions, bread; 
wine, spiritous liquors; tabacco smoking and chewing (Ars.). 
Follows well: after, Calc., Carbo v., Lach., Sulph. It is rarely 
advisable to begin the treatment of a chronic disease with Lyc. 
unless it is clearly indicated; it is better to give first another 
antipsoric. Lyc. is a deep-seated, long-acting remedy, and should 
rarely be repeated after improvement begins.
Aggravation. - Nearly all diseases from 4 to 8 p. m. (Hell. - from 4 
to 9 p. m., Col., Mag. p.).
Amelioration. - Warm food and drinks; from uncovering the head; 
loosening the garments.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Lyssin.
The Saliva of a Rabid Dog. (A Nosode.)
Ziemsen suggested Lyssin as a substitute for Hydrophobinum, 
Encyclopaedia, vol. iii, p 472. The sight or sound of running 
water or pouring water aggravates all complaints. Lyssophobia; 
fear of becoming mad. Bluish discoloration of wounds (Lach.). 
Complaints resulting from abnormal sexual desire (from 
abstinence, Con.). Mental emotion or mortifying news always 
makes him worse. Cannot bear heat of sun (Gels., Glon., Lach., 
Nat.). Convulsions: from dazzling or reflected light from water or 
mirror (Stram.); from even thinking of fluids of any kind; from 
slightest touch or current of air. Headache: from bites of dogs, 
whether rabid or not; chronic, from mental emotion or exertion; < 
by noise of running water or bright light. Salive; tough, ropy, 
viscid, frothy in mouth and throat, with constant spitting (Hydr.). 
Sore throat, constant desire to swallow (Lac. c., Mer.). Difficulty in 
swallowing, even spasm of oesophagus from swallowing liquids; 
gagging when swallowing water. Constant desire to urinate on 
seeing running water (Canth., Sulph.); urine scanty, cloudy, 
contains sugar. Prolapsus uteri; many cases of years' standing 
cured. Sensitiveness of vagina, rendering coition painful.
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Canth., Hyos., Stram., in 
hydrophobia.
Aggravation. - Sight or sound of water; bright dazzling light 
(Stram.); carriage-riding (Coc. - better from, Nit. ac.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Magnesia Carbonica.
Carbonate of Magnesia. (MgCO3,3H2O.)
For persons, especially children, of irritable disposition, nervous 
temperament (Cham.); lax fibre; sour smell of whole body 
(Rheum). The whole body feels tired and painful especially the 
legs and feet; aching, restless. Spasmodic affections of stomach 
and intestines (Col., Mag. p.), increased secretion from mucous 
membranes. Unrefreshing sleep, more tired on rising than when 
retiring (Bry., Con., Hep., Op., Sulph.). Inordinate craving for 
meat in children of tuberculous parentage. Heartburn; sour, 
belching, eructations, taste and vomiting; of pregnancy. Pains: 
neuralgic, lightening-like, < left side (Col.); insupportable during 
repose, must get up and walk (Rhus); toothache, during pregnancy 
< at night. Pain on vertex as if the hair were pulled (Kali n., 
Phos.). Menses: preceded by sore throat (Lac c.), labor-like pain, 
cutting colic, backache, weakness, chilliness; flows only at night 
or when lying, ceases when walking (Am. m., Kreos., - rev. or 
Lil.); acrid, dark, pitch-like; difficult to wash off (Med.). 
Diarrhoea: preceded by cutting, doubling-up colic; occurs regularly 
every three weeks; stools green, frothy, like scum of a frog-pond; 
white, tallow-like masses are found floating in stool; the milk 
passes undigested in nursing children. When crude magnesia has 
been taken to "sweeten the stomach;" if the symptoms correspond, 
the potentized remedy will often relieve.
Relations. - Complementary: to, Chamomilla.
Aggravation. - Change of temperature; every three weeks; rest; 
milk, during menses.
Amelioration. - Warm air, but worse in warmth of bed (Led., Mer. 
- better in warmth of bed, Ars.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Magnesia Muratica.
Chloride of Magnesia (MgCl)
Especially adapted to diseases of women; spasmodic and hysterical 
complaints, complicated with uterine diseases; who have suffered 
for years from attacks of indigestion or biliousness. Children: 
during difficult dentition are unable to digest milk; it causes pain 
in stomach and passes undigested; puny, rachitic, who crave 
sweets. Great sensitiveness to noise (Ign., Nux, Ther.). Headache: 
every six weeks, in forehead and around the eyes; as if it would 
burst; < from motion and in open air; > from lying down, strong 
pressure (Puls.), and wrapping up warmly (Sil., Stron.). Great 
tendency of head to sweat (Cal., Sanic., Sil.). Continual raising of 
white froth in mouth. Eructations, tasting like rotten eggs, like 
onions (breath smells of onions, Sinap.). Toothache; unbearable 
when food touches the teeth. Pressing pain in liver, when walking 
and touching it, liver hard, enlarged, < lying on right side (Mer., 
Kali c.). Constipation: stool hard, scanty, large, knotty, like sheep's 
dung; difficult to pass; crumbling at verge of anus (Am. m., Nat. 
m.); of infants during dentition. Urine; pale, yellow, can only be 
passed by bearing down with abdominal muscles; weakness of 
bladder; Menses: with great excitement at every speed; flow black, 
clotted; spasms and pains < in back when walking, extend into 
thighs; metrorrhagia, < at night in bed, causing hysteria (Act., 
Caul.). Leucorrhoea: after exercise; with every stool; with uterine 
spasm; followed by metrorrhagia; two weeks after menses for three 
or four days (Bar., Bov., Con.). Palpitation and cardiac pains while 
sitting. < by moving about (compare, Gels.).
Relations. - Compare: Cham. in the diseases of children.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Magnesia Phosphorica.
Phosphate of Magnesia.
Is best adapted to thin, emaciated persons of a highly nervous 
organization; dark complexion. Affections of right side of body; 
head, ear, face, chest, ovary, sciatic nerve (Bell., Bry., Chel., Kali 
c., Lyc., Pod.). Pains: sharp, cutting, stabbing; shooting, stitching; 
lightning-like in coming and going (Bell.); intermittent, paroxysym 
becoming almost unberable, driving patient to frenzy; rapidly 
changing place (Lac c., Puls.), with a constricting sensation (Cac., 
Iod., Sulph.); cramping, in neuralgic affections of stomach, 
abdomen and pelvis (Caul., Col.). Great dread: of cold air; of 
uncovering; of touching affected part; of cold bathing or washing; 
of moving. Languid, tired, exhausted; unable to sit up. Complaints 
from standing in cold water or working in cold clay (Cal.). 
Ailments of teething children; spasms during dentition, no fever 
(with fever, hot head and skin, Bell.). Headache: begins in occiput 
and extends over head (Sang., Sil.); of school girls; face red, 
flushed; from mental emotion, exertion or hard study; < 10 to 11 a. 
m. or 4 to 5 p. m.; > by pressure and external heat. Neuralgia; of 
face, supra-orbital or infra-orbital; right side; intermittent, darting, 
cutting < by touch, cold air, pressure > by external heat. 
Toothache: at night; rapidly shifting; < eating, drinking, especially 
cold things; > by heat (> by cold, Bry., Coff., Fer. p.). Spasms or 
cramps of stomach, with clean tongue, as if a hand was drawn 
tightly around body. Colic: flatulent, forcing patient to bend 
double; > by heat, rubbing and hard pressure (Col., Plumb.); of 
horses and cows when Colocynth fails to >. Menses: early; flow 
dark, stringy; pains < before, > when flow begins (Lach., Zinc.); 
pains darting, like lightning, shooting, < right side, > by heat and 
bending double; vaginismus. Enuresis: nocturnal; from nervous 
irritation; urine pale, copious; after catheterization. Cramps: of 
extremities; during pregnancy; of writers, piano or violin players.
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Caul., Col., Lyc., Lac c., Puls.; Cham. 
its vegetable analogue. Sometimes acts best when given in hot 
water.
Aggravation. - Cold air; a draft of cold air or cold wind; cold 
bathing or washing; motion; touch.
Amelioration. - Bending double; heat; warmth; pressure (burning 
pain > by heat, Ars.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Medorrhinum.
The Gonorrhoeal Virus. (A Nosode.)
For the constitutional effects of mal-treated and suppressed 
gonorrhoea, when the best selected remedy fails to relieve or 
permanently improve. For persons suffering from gout, 
rheumatism, neuralgia and diseases of the spinal cord and its 
membranes - even organic lesions ending in paralysis - which can 
be traced to a sycotic origin. For women, with chronic ovaritis, 
salpingitis, pelvic cellulitis, fibroids, cysts, and other morbid 
growths of the uterus and ovaries, especially if symptoms point to 
malignancy, with or without sycotic origin. For scirrhus, 
carcinoma or cancer, with acute or chronic in development, when 
the symptoms correspond and a history of sycosis can be traced. 
Bears the same relation in deep-seated sycotic chronic affections of 
spinal and sympathetic nervous system that Psorinum does to 
deep-seated affections of skin and mucous membranes. Children, 
pale, rachitic; dwarfed and stunted in growth (Bar. c.); mentally, 
dull and weak. Great heat and soreness, with enlargement of 
lymphatic glands all over body. Consumptive languor; fatigue; 
great general depression of vitality. Pains: arthiritic, rheumatic, in a 
sequel of suppressed gonorrhoea (Daph. od., Clem.); constricting, 
seem to tighted the whole body (Cac.); sore all over, as if bruised 
(Arn., Eup.). Trembling all over (subjective), intense nervousness 
and profound exhaustion. State of collapse, want to be fanned all 
the time (Carbo v.); craves fresh air; skin cold, yet throws off the 
covers (Camph., Sec.); bold and bathed with cold perspiration 
(Ver.).
Mind. - Weakness of memory; cannot remember names, words or 
initial letters; has to ask name of most intimate fried; even forgets 
his own name. Cannot spell correctly; wonders how a well-known 
name is spelled. Constantly loses the thread of conversation. Great 
difficulty in stating her symptoms, question has to be repeated as 
she loses herself. Cannot speak without weeping. Anticipates 
death; always anticipating, feels matters most senstively before 
they occur and generally correctly. Irritated at trifles; cross during 
the day, exhilarated at night. Very impatient; peevish. Anxious, 
nervous, extremely sensitive; starts at the least sound. Time passes 
too slowly (Alum., Arg. n., Can. I.). Is in a great hurry; when doing 
anything is in such a hurry she gets fatigued. Many symptoms are 
< when thinking of them (pains return as soon as he thinks about 
them, Ox. ac.).
Head. - Intense burning pain in brain, < in cerebellum; extends 
down spine. Head feels heavy and is drawn backwards. Sensation 
of tightness and contraction; extends down whole length of spine. 
Headache and diarrhoea from jarring of ears.
Throat. - Sensation s if she had taken a severe cold, with 
distressing aching in bones; throat sore and swollen, deglutition of 
either liquids or solids impossible (Mer.). Throat constantly filled 
thick, gray or bloody mucus from posterior nares (Hyd.).
Appetite. - Ravenous hunger immediately after eating (Cina, Lyc., 
Psor.). Constant thirst, even dreams she is drinking. Insatiate  
craving: for liquor, which before she hated (Asar.); for salt (Cal., 
Nat.); sweets (Sulph.); for ale, ice, acids, oranges, green fruit.
Bowels. - Stools: tenacious, clay-like, sluggish, cannot strain froma 
sensation of prolapse of rectum (Alum.). Constriction and inertia 
of bowels with ball-like stools (Lach.). Can only pass stool by 
leaning very far back; very painful, as if there was a lump on 
posterior surface of sphincter; so painful as to cause tears. Sharp, 
needle-like pains in rectum. Oozing of moisture from anus, feted 
odor of fish brine (Caust., Hep.).
Urinary Organs. - Sever pain (backache) in renal region, > by 
profuse urination (Lyc.). Renal colic; intense pain in ureters, with 
sensation of passage of calculus (Berb., Lyc., Ocim. c.); craving 
for ice. Nocturnal enuresis: passes enormous quantity of 
ammoniacal, high colored urine in bed every night; < by over-work 
or over-play, extremes of heat or cold, when the best selected 
remedy fails; with a history of sycosis. Painful tenesmus of bladder 
and bowels when urinating.
Sexual Organs. - Menses; profuse, very dark, clotted; stains 
difficult to wash out (Mag. c.). Metrorrhagia: at climacteric; 
profuse for weeks, flow dark clotted, offensive; in gushes, on 
moving; with malignant disease of uterus. Intense menstrual colic, 
with drawing up of knees and terrible bearing down labor-like 
pains; must press feet against support, as in labor. Intensive pruritis 
of labia and vagina < by thinking of it. Breasts and nipples sore 
and sensitive to touch. Breasts cold as ice to touch, especially the 
nipples, rest of body warm (during menses).
Respiratory Organs. - Asthma: choking caused by a weakness or 
spasm of epiglottis; larynx stopped so that no air could enter, only 
> by lying on face and protruding tongue. Soreness of larynx as if 
ulcerated. Dyspnoea and sense of constriction; can inhale with 
ease, but no power to exhale (Samb.). Cough: dry, incessant, sever; 
painful, as if mucous membrane was torn from larynx; deep, 
hollow, like coughing in a barrel; < at night, from sweets, on lying 
down; > by lying on stomach. Sputa: albuminous, frothy; small, 
green, bitter balls; viscid, difficult to raise. Incipient consumption; 
severe pains in middle lobes.
Back and Extremities. - Pain in back between scapulae; whole 
length of spine sore to touch (Chin. s.). Intense burning heat, 
beginning in nape of neck and extending down spine, with a 
contractive stiffness, < by stretching. Rheumatism of top of 
shoulder and arm; pains extend to fingers, < by motion (right, 
Sang. - left, Fer.). Lumber vertebrae painful and sensitive to touch. 
Pain in sacrum, coccyx, and back of hips running around and down 
limbs. Pains in legs, from hips to knees; only when walking. 
Heaviness of legs, feel like lead; walking very difficult, legs are so 
heavy, legs give way. Lower limbs ache all night, preventing sleep. 
Intensely restless and fidgety legs and feet (Zinc.). Terrible 
suffering in legs and arms during an electrical storm. Aching in 
legs, with inability to keep them still in bed, < when giving up 
control of himself, when relaxing, in trying to sleep. Coldness of 
legs and feet; of hands and forearms. Drawing, contracting 
sensation in hamstrings and ankles; cramps in calves and soles 
(Cup.). Ankles easily turn when walking (Carbo an., Led.). 
Burning of hands and feet, wants them uncovered and fanned 
(Lach., Sulph.). Almost entire loss of nervous force in legs and 
arms; exhausted by slightest effort. Painful stiffness of every joint 
in body. Deformity of finger joints; large, puffy, knuckles; swelling 
and painful stiffness of ankles; great tenderness of heels and balls 
of feet; swellings of all joints are puffy, like windgalls.
Relations. - Compare: Ipec., dry cough; Camph., Sec., Tab., Ver., 
in collapse; Pic. ac., Gels., inability to walk; Aloe, Sulph., morning 
diarrhoea. The burning feet of Sulphur and restless fidgety legs and 
feet of Zinc. ar both found at the same time in Medorrhinum.
Aggravation. - When thinking of it (Helon., Ox. ac.); heat, 
covering; stretching; thunder storm; least movement; sweets; from 
daylight to sunset (rev. of Syph.).
Amelioration. - At the seashore (rev. of Nat.); lying on stomach; 
damp weather (Caust., Nux).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Melilotus Alba.
Sweet Clover (Leguminosae.)
Congestions, relieved by haemorrhage. Engorgement of blood-
vessels in any part of organ. Violent congestive or nervous 
headaches; epistaxis affords relief (Bufo, Ferr. p., Magn. s.). 
Convulsions: of nervous children during dentition (Bell.); infantile 
spasms, eclampsia, epilepsy. Religious melancholy with an 
intensely red face; insanity, in early stages, to relieve brain from 
pressure and irritation. Nosebleed preceded by intense redness, 
flushing of face and throbbing of carotids (Bell.); with general 
relief. Very red face precedes haemorrhage from every organ. 
Constipation: difficult, painful, constriction in anus; throbbing, 
fulness; no desire until there is a large accumulation (Alum.).
Relations. - Compare: Amyl., Ant. c., in epistaxis after headache, 
but does not relieve; Bell., Glon., Sang. in congestive headache, 
red face, hot head, etc.
Aggravation. - Approach of a storm; rainy, changeable weather.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Menyanthes Trifoliata.
Buck Bean. (Genitanaceae.)
Complaints from abuse of Cinchona and Quinine. Fevers, in which 
the cold stage predominates; coldness felt most acutely in abdomen 
and legs. Headache: pressing in vertex from above downwards, > 
during hard pressure with hand (Ver.); as of a heavy weight 
pressing on the head at every step (Cac., Glon., Lach.); < 
ascending (Cal.); often with icy coldness of hands and feet (Cal., 
Sep.). Anxiety about the heart as if some evil was impending. 
Tension: in root of nose; in arms, hands, fingers; in skin, as if 
several sizes too small and was crowded into it by force.
Relations. - Compare: Cac., Cal., Gels., Sep., Mag. m., Paris. 
Follow well: Caps., Lach., Lyc., Puls., Rhus, Ver.
Aggravation. - During rest; lying down.
Amelioration. - Pressure on affected part.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius.
Quicksilver. (The Element.)
Best adapted for light-haired persons; skin and muscles lax. In 
bone diseases, pains worse at night; glandular swellings with or 
without suppuration, but especially if suppuration be too profuse 
(Hep., Sil.). Cold swellings; abscesses, slow to suppurate. Profuse 
perspiration attends nearly every complaint, but does not relieve; 
may even increase the suffering (profuse perspiration relieves, Nat. 
m., Psor., Ver.). Great weakness and trembling from least exertion. 
Breath and body smell foul (Psor.). Hurried and rapid talking 
(Hep.). Catarrh: with much sneezing; fluent, acrid, corrosive; 
nostrils raw, ulcerated; yellow-green, fetid, pus-like; nasal bones 
swollen; < at night and from damp weather. Toothache: pulsating, 
tearing, lacerating, shooting into face or ears; < in damp weather or 
evening air, warmth of bed, from cold or warm things; > from 
rubbing the cheek. Crowns of teeth decay, roots remain (crowns 
intact, roots decay, Mez.). Ptyalism; tenacious, soapy, stringy, 
profuse, fetid, coppery, metallic-tasting saliva. Tongue: large, 
flabby, shows imprint of teeth (Chel., Pod., Rhus); painful, with 
ulcers; red or white. Intense thirst, although the tongue looks moist 
and the saliva is profuse (dry mouth, but no thirst, Puls.). Mumps, 
diphtheria, tonsillitis with profuse offensive saliva; tongue large, 
flabby with imprint of teeth; mapped tongue (Lach., Nat., Tarax.). 
Diphtheria: tonsils inflamed, uvula swollen, elongated, constant  
desire to swallow; membrane thick, gray, shred-like borders 
adherent or free. Dysentery: stool slimy, bloody, with colic and 
fainting, great tenesmus during and after, not > by stool, followed 
by chilliness and a "cannot finish" sensation. The more blood, the 
better indicated. Quantity of urine voided is larger than the amount 
of water drunk; frequent urging to urinate. Nocturnal emissions 
stained with blood (Led., Sars.). Leucorrhoea: acrid, burning, 
itching with rawness; always worse at night; pruritis, < from 
contact of urine which must be washed off (Sulph.). Morning 
sickness; profuse salivation, wets the pillow in sleep (Lac. ac.). 
Mammae painful, as if they would ulcerate at every menstrual  
period (Con., Lac. c.); milk in breasts instead of menses. Cough: 
dry, fatiguing, racking; in two paroxysms, worse at night and from 
warmth of bed; with utter inability to lie on right side. Affects 
lower lobe of right lung; stitches through to back (Chel., Kali c.). 
Suppuration of lungs, after haemorrhages of pneumonia (Kali c.). 
Ulcers on the gums, tongue, throat, inside of the cheek, with 
profuse salivation; irregular in shape, edges undefined; have a 
dirty, unhealthy look; lardaceous base surrounded with a dark halo; 
apt to run together (syphilitic ulcers are circular, attack the 
posterior parts of mouth, throat, and have well-defined edges, are 
surrounded with coppery hue, and do not extend from their 
primary seat). Trembling extremities, especially hands; paralysis 
agitans. Ailments from sugar, insect stings, vapors of arsenic or 
copper. Diseases occurring in winter.
Relations. - Follows well: after, Bell., Hep., Lach., Sulph., but 
should not be given before or after Silicea. If given in low (weak) 
potencies hastens rather than aborts suppuration. The bad effects of 
Mer. are antidoted by Aur., Hep., Lach., Mez., Nit. ac., Sulph., and 
by a strong (high) potency of Mer., when the symptoms 
correspond. Compare: Mezereum, its vegetable analogue for bad 
effects of large doses or of too frequent repitition. Mercury is < by 
heat of, but > by rest in, bed. Arsenic is > by heat of, but < by rest 
in, bed.
Aggravation. - At night; wet damp weather (Rhus); in autumn, 
warm days and cold, damp nights; lying on right side; perspiring.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Corrosivus.
Corrosive sublimate. (HgCl2.)
Diseases of men, syphilitic; ulcers, with corroding, acrid pus; 
Bright's disease. Dysentery and summer complaints of intestinal 
canal, occurring from May to November. Tenesmus: of rectum, 
not > by stool (< by stool, Nux); incessant, persistent; stool hot, 
scanty, bloody, slimy, offensive; shreds of mucous membrane and 
terrible cutting; colicky pains. Tenesmus: of bladder, with intense 
burning in urethra; urine hot, burning, scanty or suppressed; in 
drops with great pain; bloody, brown, brick-dust sediment; 
albuminous. Gonorrhoea: second stage, greenish discharge, < at 
night; great burning and tenesmus.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Cyanide.
Cyanide of Mercury. (Hg(CN2).)
Malignant diphtheria with intense redness of fauces and great 
difficulty of swallowing; pseudo-membranous formation extends 
all over fauces and down throat; putrid, gangrenous diphtheria, 
with phagedenic ulceration; membranous croup. Great weakness;  
extreme prostration; cannot stand up from weakness. When it 
corresponds to the genus epidemicus, like every other remedy, is 
effective as a prophylactic.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Dulcis.
Calomel. (Hg2Cl2.)
Catarrhal affections of mucous membranes, especially of the eye 
and ear. Catarrhal inflammation of middle ear (Kali m.). 
Eustachian tube closed; catarrhal deafness and otorrhoea in psoric 
children; deafness of old age (Kali m.). Acute affections of 
prostrate after maltreated stricture. Deafness and catarrhal 
affections of nares, throat, and pharynx, from mercurial amalgam 
fillings. Diarrhoea: of children; stools grass-green; like chopped 
eggs; profuse, causing soreness of anus.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Proto Iodide.
Iodide of Mercury. (Hg2I2.)
Diphtheritic and throat affections where the cervical and parotid 
glands are enormously swollen; membrane begins on or is < on 
right side; < by warm drinks, and empty swallowing (Lach.). 
Tongue: thick, yellow coating at base (Kali bi. - golden yellow 
coating at base, Nat. p.; dirty or greenish-gray coating at base, Nat. 
s.); tip and edges red; right side of throat and neck most affected. 
For Hunterian (hard) chancre, secondary symptoms rarely follow if 
given in proper dose; great swelling of inguinal glands, no 
disposition to suppurate.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Biniodide.
Biniodide of Mercury. (HgI2.)
Diphtheritic and glandular affections of left side; fauces dark red; 
solids or liquids painful when swallowing; exudation slight, easily 
detached; cases attending epidemic scarlet fever, ulcers on fauces 
or tonsils; glands enlarged; greenish tough lumps from pharynx or 
posterior nares. Tubercular pharyngitis. Mercurius Solubilis. 
Hahnemann's Soluble Mercury. Nervous affections after 
suppressed discharges especially in psoric patients (Asaf.). 
Glandular and scrofulous affections of children. Otorrhoea: 
bloody, offensive discharge, with stabbing tearing pain; < right 
side, at night and lying on affected side. Furuncles and boils in 
external meatus (Pic. ac.). Polypi and fungous excresences in 
external meatus (Mar. v., Thuja). Acrid nasal secretion, having 
odor of old cheese; nostrils, red, raw, ulcerated. Epistaxis: when 
coughing; at night during sleep; hangs in a dark clotted string 
from the nose, like an circle. Gonorrhoea: with phymosis or 
chancroids; green discharge, < at night; urging to urinate; 
intolerable burning in for part of urethra when passing last few 
drops; prepuce hot, swollen, oedematous and sensitive to touch; of 
a torpid character, with threatening or suppurating bubo. Chancre: 
primary; regular indurated Hunterian, with lardaceous base; with 
cheesy bottom and inverted red edges; with phymosis or 
paraphymosis; deep, round, penetrating, eating through fraenum 
and prepuce; bleeding, painful, yellowish fetid discharge. 
Hahnemann's remedy for syphilis and diseases of the genito-
urinary tract. Is rarely indicated if the tongue is dry. Disease of the 
skin; intolerable biting, itching, over body, as from insect bites, < 
in evening and from warmth of bed; becomes pleasant on 
scratching. Weakness and weariness of limbs; sore, bruised.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mercurius Sulphuricus.
Sulphate of Mercury. (HgSO4.)
Hydrothorax, if occurring from heart or liver diseases; dyspnoea, 
has to sit, cannot lie down. Extremities swollen; stool loose, 
watery, causing severe burning and soreness; burning in chest. 
"When it acts well it produces a profuse, watery diarrhoea with 
great relief to the patient; it is as important as Arsenicum in 
hydrothorax" - Lippe.
Relations. - Compare: Ars., Cinnab., Dig., Sulph.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Mezereum.
Daphne Mezereum. (Thymelaceae.)
For light-haired, irresolute persons of a phelgmatic temperament. 
Eczema and itching eruptions after vaccinations. Hypochondriacal 
and despondent; indifferent to everything and every one; angry at 
trifles and perfectly harmless things, but is soon sorry for it. 
Toothache: in carious teeth (Kreos.); feel elongated, dull pain 
when biting on them and when touched with tongue, < at night; > 
with mouth open and drawing in air; roots decay (rev. or Mer.). 
Headache, violent after slight vexation; painful on the slightest 
touch; right sided. The head is covered with thick, leather-like 
crust, under which thick and white pus collects here and there; hair 
is glued and matted together; pus after a time is ichorous, becomes 
offensive and breeds vermin. Ulcers with thick, yellowish-white 
scabs, under which thick, yellow pus collects. Vesicles appear 
around the ulcers, itch violently, burn like fire (Hep.); shining, 
fiery-red areola around. Linen or charpie sticks to the ulcers, they 
bleed when it is torn away. Eczema: intolerable itching, < in bed 
and from touch; copious, serous exudation. Neuralgic burning 
pains after zona. Bones, especially long bones, inflamed, swollen; 
nightly pains going from above downwards; after abuse of Merc., 
after venerial diseases; caries, exostosis, tumors soften from within 
out. Pain in periosteum of long bones < at night in bed, least touch, 
in damp weather (Mer., Phyt.). Child scratches face continually, 
which is covered with blood; eruptions moist; itching worse at 
night; inflammatory redness of face.
Relations. - Compare: Caust., Guaiac., Phyt., Rhus.
Aggravation. - Cold air; cold washing; at night; touch or motion; 
bad effects of mercury or alcohol. Epidemics occurring in January 
or February often call for Mezereum.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Millefolium.
Yarrow. (Compositae.)
Ailments: from over-lifting, over-exertion, or a fall. Vertigo; when 
moving slowly, but not when taking violent exercise. 
Haemorrhages: painless, without fever; bright red, fluid blood 
(Acon., Ipec., Sab.); from lungs, bronchi, larynx, mouth, nose, 
stomach, bladder, rectum, uterus; of mechanical origin (Arn.); of 
wounds (Ham.). Wounds which bleed profusely, especially after a 
fall (Arn., Ham.). Haemoptysis: after injury; in incipient phthisis; 
in haemorrhoidal patients; from a ruptured blood vessel. Painless  
drainage, from nose, lungs, uterus; after labor or abortion; after 
great exertion; after miscarriage. Preventive in post- partum 
haemorrhage. Menses: early, profuse, protracted; suppressed, with 
colic pain in abdomen. Leucorrhoea of children from atony (Cal.). 
Cough: with raising of bright blood; in suppressed menses or 
haemorrhoids; with oppression and palpitation; after a fall from a 
height (Arn.); after violent extertion; with blood, daily at 4 p. m. 
(Lyc.).
Relations. - Compare: Erecht. in epistaxis and haemoptysis, blood 
bright red. Follows well: after, Acon., and Arn., in haemorrhages.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Muratic Acid.
Hydrochloric Acid. (HCl)
Adapted to persons with black hair, dark eyes, dark complexion. 
Irritable, peevish, disposed to anger and chagrin (Nux); 
restlessness and vertigo. Diseases of an asthenic type, with 
moaning, unconsciouness, fretfulness. Ulceration with fungus-like 
growths and pseudo-like membranous deposits of intestinal tract. 
Great debility: as soon as he sits down his eyes close; lower jaw 
hangs down; slides down in bed. Mouth and anus are chiefly 
affected; the tongue and sphincter ani are paralyzed. Malignant 
affections of mouth; studded with ulcers, deep, perforating; have a 
black or dark base; offensive, foul breath; intense prostration; 
diphtheria, scarlatina, cancer. Cannot bear the thought or sight of 
meat (Nit. ac.). If the anus be very sensitive either with or without 
haemorrhoids; anus sore during menses. Haemorrhoids: swollen,  
blue, sensitive and painful to touch; appear suddenly in children; 
too sore to bear least touch, even the sheet is uncomfortable. 
Prolapse while urinating. Diarrhoea: stool involuntary while  
urinating; on passing wind (Aloe); cannot urinate without having 
the bowels move at the same time. Urine passes slowly; bladder 
weak, must wait a long time; has to press so that the anus 
protrudes. Cannot bear least touch, not even of sheet on genitals 
(Murex). Typhoid or typhus; deep stupid sleep; unconscious while 
awake; loud moaning or muttering; tongue coated at edges, 
shrunken, dry, leather- like, paralyzed; involuntary fetid stools 
while passing urine; sliding down in bed; pulse intermits every 
third beat. Palpitation of heart is felt in the face. Freckles; eczema 
solaris.
Relations. - Follows well: after, Bry., Mer., Rhus. Cures the 
muscular weakness following excessive use of opium and tobacco.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Murex Purpurea.
A Mollusk (Muricidae)
Persons of a melancholy temperament. For the sufferings during 
climacteric (Lach., Sep., Sulph.). Great depression of spirits. 
Sinking, all gone sensation, in stomach (Sep.). Least contact of  
parts, causes violent sexual excitement (excessive sexual irritation 
driving to self abuse, Orig., Zinc.). Violent excitement in sexual 
organs, and excessive desire for an embrace (rev. of Sep.). Sore 
pain in uterus; a distinct sensation of womb (Helon., Lys.). 
Bearing down sensation, as if internal organs would be pushed out, 
must sit down and cross limbs to > pressure (but no sexual desire, 
Sep.). Menses: irregular, early, profuse, protracted, large clots. 
Leucorrhoea: < mental depression, happier when leucorrhoea is 
worse.
Relations. Compare: Lil., Plat., in nymphomania; Sep. in bearing 
down sensation, but has no sexual erethism.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Naja Tripudians.
Cobra virus. (Elapidae.)
Suicidal insanity, broods constantly over imaginary troubles 
(Aur.). Simple hypertrophy of heart. For restoring a heart damaged 
by acute inflammation, or from relief of sufferings of chronic 
hypertrophy and valvular lesions. Irritating, dry, sympathetic 
cough in the acute stage of rheumatic carditis, or chronic organic 
lesions (Spon.). Threatened paralysis of heart, post-diphtheritic. 
Pulse irregular in force, but regular in rhythm. Inability to speak 
with choking, nervous, chronic palpitation, especially after public 
speaking; pain < by carriage riding or lying on side. Severe 
stitching pain in region of heart.
Relations. - Compare: Ars., Cac., Crot., Lach., Myg., Spig.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Natrum Carbonicum.
Carbonate of Soda (Na2CO3,10H2O.)
Constitutions with aversion to open air and dislike to exercise, 
mental or physical; imbecility. Great debility: caused by heat of 
summer (Ant. c.); exhaustion from least effort, mental or physical; 
ready to drop after a walk; chronic effects of sunstroke. Chronic 
effects of sunstroke; now, with the return of hot weather, suffers 
from headaches. Emaciation with pale face and blue rings around 
the eyes, dilated pupils; dark urine; anaemic; milky, watery skin 
and great debility. Inability to think or perform any mental labor, 
causes headache; feels stupefied if he tries to exert himself; 
comprehension slow, difficult. Intolerable melancholy and 
apprehension; is wholly occupied with sad thoughts. Attacks of 
anxiety and restlessness during a thunder storm (Phos.); < from 
music (Sab.). Headache: from slightest mental exertion; form sun 
or working under gaslight (Glon., Lach.); with tension in nape or 
occiput before menses; head feels too large, as it it would burst. 
Face pale, with blue rings around eyes; eyelids swollen; catarrh; 
mucus in throat and posterior nares; constantly hawking to clear 
throat; dropping into the throat from posterior nares. Catarrh: 
extends to posterior nares and throat; hawking much thick mucus 
from throat; profuse discharge during day, stopped at night (Nux). 
Thick, yellow, green, offensive, musty, hard discharge from nose; 
often ceasing after a meal. Aversion to milk; diarrhoea from it. 
Bearing down as if everything would come out (Agar., Lil., Mur., 
Sep.); heaviness, < sitting, > by moving. Discharge of mucus from 
vagina after an embrace, causing sterility. Easy dislocation and 
spraining of ankle (Led.); so weak that it give way; foot bends 
under (Carbo an., Nat m.).
Relations. - Compare: Nat s., for yeast-like vomiting; Cal., Sep. 
Follows well: after, Sep., in bearing down.
Aggravations. - From music; in the sun; excessive summer heat; 
mental exertion; a thunder storm.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Natrum Muriaticum.
Common Salt (NaCl)
For the anaemic and cachetic; whether from loss of vital fluids - 
profuse menses, seminal losses - or mental affections. Great 
emaciation; loosing flesh while living well (Abrot., Iod.); throat 
and neck of child emaciate rapidly during summer complaint 
(Sanic.). Great liability to take cold (Cal., Kali c.). Irritability: child 
cross when spoken to; crying from slightest cause; gets into a 
passion about trifles, especially when consoled with. Awkward, 
hasty, drops things from nervous weakness (Apis, Bov.). Marked 
disposition to weep; sad weeping mood without cause (Puls.), but 
consolation from others < her troubles. Headache: anaemic, of 
school girls (Cal. p.); from sunrise to sunset; left sided clavus; as if 
bursting; with red face, nausea and vomiting before, during and 
after menses; as though a thousand little hammers were knocking 
in the brain during fever; > by perspiration. Headache; beginning  
with blindness (Iris, Kali bi.); with zig-zag dazzling, like lightening 
in eyes, ushering in a throbbing headache; from eye strain. 
Lachrymation; tears stream down the face whenever he coughs 
(Euphr.). Hay fever: squirming sensation in the nostril, as of a 
small worm; brought on by exposure to hot sun or intense summer 
heat. Sensation as of a hair on the tongue (Sil.). Tongue: mapped, 
with red insular patches; like ringworm on sides (Ars., Lach., 
Mer., Nit. ac., tarax.); heavy, difficult speech, children slow in 
learning to walk. Constipation: sensation of contraction of anus; 
torn, bleeding, smarting afterwards; stool, dry, hard, difficult, 
crumbling (Am. c., Mag. m.); stitches in rectum (Nit. ac.); 
involuntary, knows not whether flatus or faeces escape (Aloe, Iod., 
Mur. ac., Olean., Pod.). Urine: involuntary when walking, 
coughing, laughing (Caust., Puls., Scilla); has to wait a long while 
or urine to pass, if others are present (Hep., Mur. ac.); cutting in 
urethra after (Sars.). Seminal emission: soon after coition, with 
increased desire; weakness of organs with retarted emission during 
an embrace; impotence, spinal irritation, paralysis, after sexual 
excesses. Pressing, pushing towards genitals every morning; must 
sit down to prevent prolapsus (Lil., Mur., Sep.). Fluttering of the 
heart; with a weak, faint feeling < lying down (Lach.). The heart's 
pulsations shake the body (Spig.). The hair falls out when touched, 
in nursing women (Sep.); face oily, shiny, as if greased (Plb., 
Thuja). For the bad effects: of anger (caused by offence); acid 
food, bread, quinine, excessive use of salt; of cauterization of all 
kinds with the silver nitrate; to grief, fright, vexation, mortification 
or reserved displeasure (Staph.). Hangnails: skin around the nails 
dry and cracked (Graph., Pet.); herpes about anus and on borders 
of hair at nape of neck (in bend of knees, Hep., Graph.). Warts on 
palms of hands (sore to touch, Nat. c.). Dreams: of robbers in the 
house, and on waking, will not believe to the contrary until search 
is made (Psor.); of burning thirst. Fever blisters, like pearls about 
the lips; lips dry, sore and cracked, ulcerated (Nit. ac.). Painful 
contractions of the hamstrings (Am. m., Caust., Guaiac.). Craving 
for salt (Cal., Caust.); great aversion to bread. Eczema; raw, red, 
inflamed, especially in edges of hair; < from eating too much salt, 
at sea shore, or from ocean voyage. Urticaria, acute or chronic; 
over whole body; especially after violent exercise (Apis, Cal., 
Hep., Sanic., Urt.). Intermittents: paroxysm at 10 or 11 a. m.; old, 
chronic, badly treated cased, especially after suppression by 
quinine; headache, with unconsciousness during chill and heat; 
sweat > pains.
Relations. - Complementary: to, Apis, acts well before and after it. 
Natrum mur. is the chronic of Ignatia, which is its vegetable 
analogue. Is followed by Sepia and Thuja. Cannot often be 
repeated in chronic cases without an intercurrent, called for by the 
symptoms. Should never be given during fever paroxysm. If 
vertigo and headache be very persistent, or prostration be 
prolonged after Natrum, Nux will relieve.
Aggravation. - At 10 or 11 a. m.; at the seashore or form sea air; 
heat of sun or stove; mental exertion, taling, writing, reading; lying 
down.
Amelioration. - In the open air (Apis, Puls.); cold bathing; going 
without regular meals; lying on right side (on painful side, Bry., 
Ign., Puls.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Natrum Sulphuricum.
Sodium Sulphate (NaOSO3,10Aq)
Ailments which are < by, or which depend upon, dampness of 
weather, damp houses or cellars (Aran.). Patient feets every change 
from dry to wet; cannot tolerate sea air, nor eat plants that thrive 
near water; a constitution in which gonorrhoeal poison is most 
pernicious; recovers slowly from every sickness. Every spring, 
skin affections reappear (Psor.). Inability to think (Nat. c.). Sad, 
gloomy, irritable; worse in mornings; dislikes to speak or be 
spoken to (Iod., Sil.). Depressed; lively music makes her sad; 
satiety of like; must use great self-control to prevent shooting 
himself. Mental traumatism; mental effects from injuries to head; 
chronic brain effects of blows, falls. Granular lids: like small  
blisters (Thuja); green pus and terrible photophobia; gonorrhoeal 
or sycotic. Nosebleed during menses (instead of menses, Bry., 
Puls.). Toothache > by cold water, cool air (Coff., Puls.). Dirty, 
greenish-gray or brown coating on tongue. Diarrhoea: sudden, 
urging, gushing, much flatus; on first rising and standing on the 
feet; after a spell of wet weather; living on working in basements. 
Gonorrhoea: greenish-yellow, painless, thick discharge (Puls.); 
chronic or suppressed (thick, green, Kali iod.). Dyspnoea; desire to 
take a deep breath during damp, cloudy weather. Humid asthma in 
children; with every change to wet weather; with every fresh cold; 
always worse in damp, rainy weather; sputa green, greenish, 
copious (greenish grey, Cop.). Sycotic pneumonia; lower lobe of 
left lung; great soreness of chest, during cough, has to sit up in bed 
and hold the chest with both hands (Nic. - right lung, Bry.). Spinal 
meningitis: violent crushing gnawing pains at base of brain; head 
drawn back; spasms with mental irritability and delirium; violent 
congestion of blood to head; delirium; opisthotonos.
Relations. - Compare: Nat. m. and Sulph., which are very similar; 
Thuja and Merc., in syphillis and sycosis occurring in hydrogenoid 
constitutions.
Aggravation. - Damp basements or dwellings; damp weather 
(Aran., Ars. i., Dul.); rest; lying.
Amelioration. - Dry weather; pressure, sitting up (cough); 
changing position (but > in wet weather, Caust.); open air. Must 
change position frequently, but it is painful and gives little relief 
(Caust.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Nitric Acid.
Nitric Acid. (HNO3.)
Especially suited to thin persons of rigid fibre, dark complexions, 
black hair and eyes - the brunette rather than the blonde - nervous 
temperament. Persons suffering with chronic diseases who take 
cold easily; are easily disposed to diarrhoea; rarely to those who 
suffer with constipation. Old people with great weakness and 
diarrhoea. Excessive physical irritability. Pains: sticking, pricking 
as from splinters; suddenly appearing and disappearing; on 
change of temperature or weather; during sleep; gnawing here and 
there as from ulcers forming. Sensation: of a band around head, 
around the bones (Carb. ac., Sulph.); of a splinter in affected parts, 
ulcers, piles, throat, ingrowning toe nail, < on slightest contact. 
Ailments: which depend on some virulent poison; from mercury, 
syphilis, scrofula; in broken-down cachetic constitutions. After 
continual loss of sleep, long-lasting anxiety, over-exertion of mind 
and body from nursing the sick (Coc.); anguish from the loss of his 
dearest friend; indifference; tired of life; sadness before menses. 
Great anxiety about his disease; constantly thinking about his past 
troubles; morbid fear of cholera (Ars.); depressed and anxious in 
the evening. Irritable, headstrong; hateful and vindictive; 
inveterate, ill-willed, unmoved by apologies. Hardness of hearing 
> by riding in carriage or train (Graph.). Very sensitive to rattle of 
wagon over paved streets; headache from pressure of hat (Cal. p., 
Carbo., Nat.). Ozaena: green casts from the nose every morning. 
Diarrhoea: great straining but little passes, as if faeces remained 
and cannot be expelled (Alum.); pain as if rectum or anus were 
torn or fissured (Nat. m.). violent cutting pains after stool, lasting 
for hours (Rat., Sulph. - during and after, Mer.). Fissures in 
rectum; tearing, spasmodic pains during stools; lancinating, even 
after soft stools (Alumen., Nat., Rat.). Urine: scanty, dark-brown, 
strong-smelling, "like horse's urine;" cold when it passes; turbid, 
looks like remains of a cider barrel. Ulcers: easily bleeding; in 
corners of mouth (Nat.); splinter-like pains, especially on contact 
(Hep.); zig-zag, irregular edges; base looks like raw flesh; 
exuberant granulations; after mercury or syphillis or both, 
engrafted on a scrofulous base. Discharges; thin, offensive, acrid; 
of a brown or dirty yellowish green color; rarely laudable pus. 
Haemorrhage: from bowels in typhoid or typhus (Crot., Mur. ac.); 
after miscarriage or post-partum; from over-exertion of body; 
bright, profuse, or dark. Cracking: in ears, on masticating; of the 
joints, on motion (Coc., Graph.). Warts, condylomata: sycotic or 
syphilitic; large, jagged, pedunculated; bleeding readily on 
washing; moist, oozing, sticking pain (Staph., Thuja). Affects 
especially the mucous membrane join; mouth, nose, rectum, anus, 
urethra, vagina (Mur. ac.).
Relations. - Complementary: Ars., and Calad. Inimical: to, 
Lachesis. Resembles: Ars. in morbid fear of cholera. Often 
difficult to distinguish from Mer.; but is adapted to black-haired 
people, while Mer. is more useful in light-haired persons. Relieve 
ailments resulting from abuse of mercury, especially, if there be 
erethism; bad effects of repeated doses of Digitalis. Follows well: 
Calc., Hep., Mer., Nat. c., Puls. or Thuja; but is most effective after 
Kali c.
Aggravation. - Evening and at night; after midnight; contact; 
change of temperature or weather; during sweat; on waking; while 
walking.
Amelioration. - While riding in carriage (reverse of Coc.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Nux Moschata.
Nutmeg. (Myristicaceae.)
Adapted especially to women and children of a nervous hysterical 
temperament (Ign.); to people with a dry skin who rarely perspire; 
complaints of pregnancy. Weakness of old age; dyspepsia of old 
people. Oversensitive: to light; of hearing; of smell; to touch. All 
the ailments are accompanied by drowsiness and sleepiness (Ant. 
t., Op.) or an inclination to faint even from slight pain (Hep.); 
complaints cause sleepiness. Stupor and insensibility; 
unconquerable sleep. Absence of mind; cannot think; great 
indifference to everything. Weakness or loss of memory (Anac., 
Lac c., Lyc.). Vanishing of thoughts while reading, talking or 
writing; using wrong words; does not recognize well known streets 
(Can. I., Lach.). Changeable humor; one moment laughing, the 
next crying (Croc., Ign.); "sudden change from grave to gay, from 
lively to serene" (Plat.). Dryness of eyes; too dry to close the lids. 
Great dryness of the mouth (Apis, Lach.); tongue so dry it  
adheres to roof of mouth; saliva seemed like cotton; throat dry, 
stiffened, no thirst (Puls.). Sensation of great dryness without real 
thirst and without actual dryness of the tongue. Great soreness of 
all the parts upon which one lies (Bap., Pry.); tendency to bed 
sores. Eating a little too much causes headache; painfulness and 
distress in stomach while eating or immediately after (Kali bi.). 
Abdomen enormously distended, after every meal. Diarrhoea: in 
summer, from cold drinks; epidemic in autumn, white stools 
(Colch.); from boiled milk; during dentition; during pregnancy; 
with sleepiness and fainting; in autumn, epidemic, white, fetid 
(Colch.). At every menstrual nisus, mouth, throat and tongue 
become intolerably dry, especially when sleeping. Leucorrhoea in 
place of menses (Coc.); patient, awakened with dry tongue (Lach.); 
physometra (Lac c., Lyc.). Pain, nausea and vomiting; during 
pregnancy; from wearing pessaries. Sudden hoarseness, < from 
walking against the wind (Euph., Hep.). Cough caused by: getting 
warm in bed; being overheated; during pregnancy (Con.); bathing, 
standing in water; living in cold, damp places (Nat. s.); loose after 
eating, dry after drinking. Sleep: irresistibly drowsy; sleepy, 
muddled, as if intoxicated; coma, lies silent, immovable; eyes 
constantly closed (with stetorous breathing, Op.). Rheumatic 
affections; from getting feet wet; from exposure to drafts to air 
while heated (Acon., Bry.); < in cold, wet weather, or cold wet 
clothes (Rhus); of left shoulder (Fer.). Backache, while riding in a 
carriage. Fatigue, must lie down after least exertion.
Relations. - Nux moschata antidoes mercurial inhalation, lead 
colic, oil of turpentine, spiritous liquors and especially the effects 
of bad beers.
Aggravation. - Cold, wet, windy weather (Rhod.); weather 
changes; cold food, water and cold washing; carriage driving 
(Coc.); lying on painful side ([Bry.], on painless side, Puls.).
Amelioration. - In dry, warm weather; warm room; wrapping up 
warmly.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Nux Vomica.
Poison Nut. (Loganiaccae.)
Adapted to thin, irritable, careful, zealous persons with dark hair 
and bilious or sanguine temperament. Disposed to be quarrelsome, 
spiteful, malacious; nervous and melancholic. Debauchers of a 
thin, irritable, nervous disposition; prone to indigestion and 
haemorrhoids (persons with light hair, blue eyes, Lob.). "Nux is 
chiefly successful with persons of an ardent character; of an 
irritable, impatient temperament, disposed to anger, spite or 
deception." - Hahnemann. Anxiety with irritability and inclination 
to commit suicide, but is afraid to die. Hypochondriac: literary, 
studious persons, who are too much at home, suffer from want of 
exercise, with gastric, abdominal complaints and costiveness; 
especially in drunkards. Oversensitive; to external impressions; to  
noise, odors, light or music (Nux m.); trifling ailments are 
unbearable (Cham.); every harmless word offends (Ign.). Persons 
who are very particular, careful, but inclined to become easily 
excited or angered; irascible and tenacious. Bad effects of: coffee, 
tabacco, alcoholic stimulants; highly spiced or seasoned food; 
over-eating (Ant. c.); long continued mental over- exertion; 
sedentary habits; loss of sleep (Coc., Colch., Nit. ac.); aromatic or 
patent medicines; sitting on cold stones; specially in warm 
weather. One of the best remedies with which to commence 
treatment of cases that have been drugged by mixtures, bitters, 
vegetable pills, nostrums or quack remedies, especially aromatic or 
"hot medicines." but only if symptoms correspond. Convulsions, 
with consciousness (Strych.); < anger, emotion, touch, moving. 
Pains are ingling, sticking, hard, aching, worse from motion and 
contact. Tendency to faint (Nux m., Sulph.); from odors; in 
morning; after eating; after every labor pain. Cannot keep from 
falling asleep in the evening while sitting or reading hours before 
bedtime, and wakes at 3 or 4 a. m.; falls into a dreamy sleep at 
daybreak from which he is hard to arouse, and then feels tired and 
weak (reverse of, Puls.). Catarrh: snuffles of infants (Am. c., 
Samb.); coryza, dry at night, fluent by day; < in warm room, > in 
cold air; from sitting in cold places, on stone steps. Eructations: 
sour, bitter, nausea and vomiting every morning with depression of 
spirits; after eating. Nausea: constant; after eating; in morning; 
from smoking; and feels "If I could only vomit I would be so much 
better.". Stomach: pressure an hour or two after eating as from a 
stone (immediately after, Kali bi., Nux m.); pyrosis, tightness, 
must loosen clothing; cannot use the mind for two or three hours 
after a meal; sleepy after dinner; from anxiety, worry, brandy, 
coffee, drugs, night watching, high living, etc. Constipation; with 
frequent unsuccessful desire, passing small quantities of faeces (in 
upper abdomen, Ign., Ver.); sensation as if not finished. Frequent 
desire fro stool; anxious, ineffectual, > for a time after stool; in 
morning after rising; after mental exertion (inactive, no desire, 
Bry., Op., Sulph.). Alternate constipation and diarrhoea (Sulph., 
Ver.), in persons who have taken purgatives all their lives. Menses: 
too early, profuse, lasts too long; or keeping on several days 
longer, with complaints at onset and remaining after; every two 
weeks; irregular, never at right time; stopping and starting again 
(Sulph.); during and after, < of old symptoms. Labor pains: violent, 
spasmodic; cause urging to stool or urinate; < in back; prefers a 
warm room. Strangulated hernia, especially umbilical. Backache: 
must sit up to turn over in bed; lumbago; from sexual weakness, 
from masturbation. Repugnance to cold or to cold air; chilly, on 
least movement; from being uncovered; must be covered in every 
stage of fever - chill, heat or sweat. Fever: great heat, whole body 
burning hot (Acon.), face red and hot (Bell.), yet patient cannot  
move or uncover without being chilly.
Relations. - Complemenatary: Sulphur in nearly all diseases. 
Inimical: to, Zinc.; must not be used before or after. Follows well: 
after, Ars., Ipec., Phos., Sep., Sulph. Is followed well: by, Bry., 
Puls., Sulph. Nux should be given on retiring or, what is better, 
several hours before going to bed; it acts best during repose of 
mind and body.
Aggravation. - Morning: waking at 4 a. m.; mental exertion; after 
eating or over-eating; touch, noise, anger, spices, narcotics, dry 
weather; in cold air.
Amelioration. - In evening, while at rest; lying down, and in 
damp, wet weather (Caust.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Opium.
Poppy. (Papaveraceae.)
Especially adapted to children and old people; diseases of first and 
second childhood (Bar. c., Mill.), persons with light hair, lax 
muscles, and want of bodily irritability. Want of susceptability to 
remedies; lack of vital reaction, the well chosen remedy makes no 
impression (Carbo v., Laur., Val.). Ailments: with insensibility and 
partial or complete paralysis; that originate from fright, bad effects 
of, the fear still remaining (Acon., Hyos.); from charcoal vapors; 
from inhaling gas; of drunkards. All complaints; with great 
sopor; painless, complains of nothing; wants nothing. Spasms: 
of children, from approach of strangers; from nursing after fright 
of mother (Hyos. - after anger of mother, Cham., Nux); from 
crying; eyes half open and upturned. Screaming before or during a 
spasm (Apis, Hell.). Deep stetorous respiration both on inhalation 
and exhalation. Delirium, constantly talking; eyes wide open, face 
red, puffed; or unconscious, eyes glassy, half-closed, face pale, 
deep coma; preceded by stupor. Thinks she is not at home (Bry.); 
this is continually in her mind. Picking of bed clothes during sleep 
(while awake, Bell., Hyos.). Delirium tremens: in old emaciated 
persons; bloated face, stupor, eyes burning, hot, dry; with loud 
snoring. Sleep: heavy, stupid; with stetorous breathing, red, face,  
eyes, half-closed, blood-shot; skin covered with hot sweat; after 
convulsions. Sleepy, but cannot sleep (Bell., Cham.), sleeplessness 
with acuteness of hearing, clock striking and cocks crowing at 
great distance keep her awake. Loss of breath on falling asleep 
(Grind., Lach.). Bed feels so hot she cannot lie on it (bed feels 
hard, Arn., Bry., Pyr.); moves often in search of a cool place; must 
be uncovered. Digestive organs inactive; peristaltic motion 
reversed or paralyzed; bowels seem closed. Constipation: of 
children; of corpulent, good-natured women (Graph.); from 
inaction or paresis, no desire; from lead poisoning; stool hard, 
round black balls (Chel., Plumb., Thuja); faeces protrude and 
recede (Sil., Thuja). Stool: involuntary, especially after fright 
(Gels.); black and offensive; from paralysis of sphincter. Urine: 
retained, with bladder full; retention, post-partum or from 
excessive use of tobacco; in nursing children, after passion of 
nurse; in fever or acute illness; paralysis of bladder or sphincter. 
(In Stramonium we have suppression; while in Opium the 
secretion is not diminished, the bladder is full but fullness is 
unrecognized.). Opium renders the intestines so sluggish that the 
most active purgatives lose their power. - Hering. Persistent 
diarrhoea in those treated with large doses of the drug. - Lippe. 
Sudden retrocession of acute exanthema results in paralysis of 
brain or convulsions (Zinc.). Marasmus; child with wrinkled skin, 
looks like a little dried up old man (Abrot.).
Relations. - Antidoes, for poisonous doses; strong coffee, Nux, 
Kali per. and constant motion. When symptoms correspond, the 
potencies may antidote bad effects of Opium drugging. Compare: 
Apis, Bell., Hyos., Stram. and Zinc.
Aggravation. - During and after sleep (Apis, Lach.); while 
perspiring; from warmth; stimulants.
Amelioration. - From cold; constant walking.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Petroleum.
Coal or Rock Oil. (Anthracite)
Adapted to persons with light hair and skin; irritable, quarrelsome 
disposition (Nux); easily offended at trifles (Ign., Med.); vexed at 
everything. Ailments: from riding in a carriage, railroad car, or in a 
ship (Coc., Sanic.). Ailments which are worse before and during a 
thunderstorm (Nat. c., Phos., Psor.). Symptoms appear and 
disappear rapidly (Bell., Mag. p. - reverse of Plat., Stan.). During 
sleep or delirium: imagines that one leg is double; that another  
person lies alongside of him in same bed; that there are two babies  
in the bed (Val.). Vertigo on rising (Bry.); in occiput; as if 
intoxicated; like seasickness (Coc.). Headache: in occiput, which is  
as heavy as lead; pressing, pulsating pain; as if everything in the 
head were alive; numb, bruised, as if made of wood. Gastralgia: of 
pregnancy; with pressing, drawing pains; whenever stomach is  
empty; relieved by constant eating (Anac., Chel., Sep.). Diarrhoea: 
yellow, watery, gushing; after cabbage, sour krout; during 
pregnancy, stormy weather; always in the daytime. Painful 
sensitiveness of skin of whole body; all clothing is painful; slight 
injury suppurates (Hep.). Skin of hands rough, cracked, tips of  
fingers rough, cracked, fissured, every winter; tenderness of the 
feet, which are bathed in foul-smelling sweat (Graph., Sanic., Sil.). 
Herpes: of genital organs extending to perineum and thighs; 
itching, redness; skin cracked, rough, bleeding; dry or moist. Heat 
and burning of soles of feet and palms of hands (Sang., Sulph.). 
Sweat and moisture of external genitals, both sexes. Painful, 
itching chilblains and chapped hands < in cold weather; decubitus. 
Sensation of coldness about the heart (Carbo an., Kali m., Nat. m.).
Relations. - One of our best antidotes for lead poisoning. The skin 
symptoms are worse in winter, better in summer (Alum.); if 
suppressed, causes diarrhoea.
Aggravation. - Carriage riding (Coc., Sanic.); during a 
thunderstorm; in winter (Alum.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Petroselinum.
Parsley. (Umbelliferae.)
Intermittent fever: complicating traumatic or chronic urethritis or 
stricture; with abdominal affections and perverted or defective 
assimilation. Thirsty and hungry, yet as soon as they begin to eat or 
drink they loose all desire (rev. of, Cal.). Sudden urging to 
urinate (Canth.). Child suddenly seized with desire to urinate; if 
cannot be gratified at once, jumps up and down with pain. Burning, 
tingling from perineum throughout whole urethra. Frequent 
voluptuous tickling in fossa navicularis. Gonorrhoea: sudden 
irresistible desire to urinate; intense biting, itching, deep in urethra, 
must rub it with some rough article in urethra for >; pain at root of 
penis or neck of bladder. Gleet.
Relations. - Compare: Can., Canth., Mer. in sudden urging to 
urinate.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Phosphoric Acid.
Glacial Phosphoric Acid. (HPO3.)
Best suited to persons of originally strong constitutions, who have 
become debilitated by loss of vital fluids, sexual excesses 
(Cinch.); violent acute diseases; chagrin, or a long succession of 
moral emotions, as grief, care, disappointed affection. Ailments: 
from care, chagrin, grief, sorrow, homesickness (Ign.); sleepy, 
disposed to weep; night-sweats towards morning. Pale sickly 
complexion, eyes sunken and surrounded by blue margins. Mild 
yielding disposition (Puls.). Is listless, apathetic; indifferent to the  
affairs of life; prostrated and stupefied with grief; to those things 
that used to be of most interest, especially if there be debility and 
emaciation. Delirium: muttering, unintelligible; lies in a stupor, or 
a stupid sleep, unconscious of all that is going on around him; 
when aroused is fully conscious, answers slowly and correctly and 
relapses into stupor. In children and young people who grow too 
rapidly (Cal., Cal. p.); pains in back and limbs as if beaten. 
Headache: crushing weight on vertex, from long lasting grief or 
exhausted nerves; in occiput and nape; usually from behind 
forward, < by least motion, noise, especially music, > lying (Bry., 
Gels., Sil.). Headache of school girls from eye-strain or overuse of 
eyes (Cal. p., Nat. m.); of students who are growing too fast. 
Patient trembles, legs weak, stumbles easily or makes missteps; 
weak and indifferent to the affairs of life. Interstitial inflammation 
of bones, scrofulous, sycotic, syphilitic, mercurial; periossteum 
inflamed, pains burning, tearing, as if scraped with a knife (Rhus); 
caries, rachitis, but not necrosis; growing pains. Boring, drawing, 
digging pains in nerves of extremities; neurosis is stump after 
amputations (Cepa.). Diarrhoea: painless; not debilitating; white or 
yellow; watery; from acids; involuntary, with the flatus (Aloe, Nat. 
m.); choleric, from fear. Urine: looks like milk mixed with jelly-
like, bloody pieces; decomposes rapidly; profuse urination at night  
of clear, watery urine, which forms a white cloud at once 
(phosphates in excess, nerve waste). Onanism; when patient is 
greatly distressed by the culpability of the act (compare Dios., 
Staph.). Emissions: frequent, profuse, debilitating; after coitus; 
most desire, after; several in one night; abashed, sad, despair of  
cure (with irresistible tendency to masturbate, Ust.). Chest; weak 
from talking or coughing (Stan.); in phthisis; nervous from loss of 
vital fluids, too rapid growth, depressing mental emotions. 
Cerebral typhoid or typhus; complete apathy and stupor; takes 
no notice, "lies like a log," utterly regardless of surrounding; 
intestinal haemorrhage, blood dark.
Relations. - Compare: Phos., Puls., Pic. ac., Sil.; Mur. ac. in 
typhoid; Nit. sp. d. in apathetic stupor and delirium. Phos. ac. acts 
well before or after Cinch. in colliquative sweats, diarrhoea, 
debility; after Nux in fainting after a meal.
Aggravation. - From mental affections; loss of vital fluids, 
especially seminal; self abuse; sexual excesses; talking causes 
weakness in chest (Stan.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Phosphorus.
Phosphorus. (The Element.)
Adapted to tall slender persons of sanguine temperament, fair skin, 
delicate eyelashes, find blond, or red hair, quick perceptions, and 
very sensitive nature. Young people, who grow too rapidly, are 
inclined to stoop (to walk stooped, Sulph.); who are chlorotic or 
anaemic; old people, with morning diarrhoea. Nervous, weak; 
desires to be magnetized (Sil.). Oversensitiveness of all the senses 
to external impressions, light, noise, odors, touch. Restless, 
fidgety; moves continually, cannot sit or stand still a moment 
(restless, fidgety feet, Zinc.). Burning: in spots along the spine; 
between the scapulae (as of a piece of ice, Lachn.); or intense heat 
running up the back; of palms of hands (Lach.); in chest and lungs; 
of every organ or tissue of the body (Ars., Sulph.); generally in 
diseases of nervous system. Haemorrhagic diathesis; small wounds 
bleed profusely (Kreos., Lach.); from every mucous outlet. Great 
weakness and prostration; with nervous debility and trembling; of 
whole body; weakness and weariness from loss of vital fluids 
(Cinch., Phos. ac.). Pain: acute, especially in the chest, < from 
pressure, even slight, in intercostal spaces, and lying on left side; 
excited by slightest chill; open air intolerable. A Weak, empty, 
all-gone sensation in head, chest, stomach and entire abdomen. 
Apathetic; unwilling to talk; answers slowly; moves sluggishly 
(Phos. ac.). Weary of life, full of gloomy forebodings. Dandruff, 
falls out in clouds (Lyc.); hair falls out in bunches, baldness of 
single spots. Eyes: hollow, surrounded by blue rings; lids, puffy, 
swollen, oedematous (upper lids, Kali c.; lower, Apis). Longs for: 
cold food and drink; juicy, refreshing things; ice cream > gastric 
pains. As soon as water becomes warm in stomach it is thrown up. 
Regurgitation of ingesta in mouthfuls (Alum.). Nausea from 
placing hands in warm water; sneezing and coryza from putting 
hands in water (Lac d.). Constipation: faeces slender, long, dry, 
tough, and hard (Stap.); voided with great straining and difficulty 
(Caust.). Diarrhoea: as soon as anything enters the rectum; profuse, 
pouring away as from a hydrant; watery, with sago-like particles; 
sensation, as if the anus remained open (Apis), involuntary; 
during cholera time (which precedes cholera, Phos. ac.); morning, 
of old people. Haemorrhage: frequent and profuse, pouring out 
freely and then ceasing for a time; metrorrhagia, in cancer; 
haemoptysis, vicarious, from nose, stomach, anus, urethra, in 
amenorrhoea. Heaviness of chest, as if weight were lying on it. 
During pregnancy; unable to drink water; sight of it causes 
vomiting; must close her eyes while bathing (Lys.). Cannot talk, 
the larynx is so painful; is dry, raw, rough, sore. Cough: going 
from warm to cold air (rev. of Bry.); < from laughing, talking, 
reading, drinking, eating, lying on the left side (Dros., Stan.). 
Perspiration has the odor of sulphur. Necrosis of the (left) lower 
jaw.
Relations. - Complementary: Arsenic, with which itis isomorphic; 
Cepa, its vegetable analogue. Incompatible: with Causticum, must 
not be used before or after. Phos. removes the bad effects of Iodine 
and excessive use of table salt. Follows well: after, Calc. or Cinch. 
Hahnemann says: "Acts most beneficial when patient suffers form 
chronic loose stool or diarrhoea.".
Aggravation. - Evening, before midnight (Puls., Rhus); lying on 
left or painful side; during a thunderstorm; weather changes, either 
hot or cold. Cold air relieves the head and face symptoms but 
aggravates those of chest, throat and neck.
Amelioration. - In the dark; lying on right side; from being rubbed 
or mesmerized; from cold food, cold water, until it gets warm.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
   
Physostigma.
Calabar Bean. (Leguminosae)
Uncommon mental activity; cannot stop thinking. Vision dim; 
from blur or film; objects mixed. Pain after using eyes; floating 
black spots, flashes of light, twitching of lids and muscles of eyes 
(Agar.); mystagmus. Great prostration of muscular system; 
impaired locomotion (Gels.). Tremors or trembling of young 
persons from mental or physical disturbances. Idiopathic or 
traumatic tetanus; brought on or < by slightest breath of air from a 
person passing (Hyper., Lys., Nux, Strych.).
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Con., Cur., Gels., Hyper., Strych.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Phytolacca.
Poke Root. (Phytolaccaceae.)
Patients of a rheumatic diathesis; rheumatism of fibrous and 
periosteal tissue; mercurial or syphillitic. Emaciation, chlorosis; 
loss of fat. Great exhaustion and profound prostration. Occupies a 
position between Bryonia and Rhus; cures when these fail, though 
apparently well indicated. In rheumatism and neuralgia after 
diphtheria, gonorrhea, mercury or syphilis. Pain flying like electric 
shocks; shooting, lancinating: rapidly shifting (Lac c., Puls.); 
worse from motion and at night. Entire indifference to life; sure 
she will die. Vertigo: when rising from bed feels faint (Bry.). 
Intense headache and backache; lame, sore bruised feeling all over; 
constant desire to move but motion < pains (Lac c., Mer. - motion 
> Rhus). Irresistible desire to bit the teeth or gums together (Pod.); 
during dentition. Sore throat; of a dark color; uvula large, 
dropsical, almost translucent (Kali bi., Rhus). Diphtheria: pains 
shoot from throat into ears on swallowing; great pain at root of 
tongue when swallowing; burning, as from a coal of fire or a red-
hot iron: dryness; difficult to swallow with trembling of the hands; 
sensation of a lump in the throat with continuous desire to 
swallow; tonsils, uvula and back part of throat covered with ash-
colored membrane; cannot drink hot fluids (Lach.). Carotid and 
submaxillary glands indurated after diphtheria, scarlet fever. 
Mammae full of hard, painful nodosities. Breast; shows an early 
tendency to cake; is full, stony, hard and painful, especially 
when suppuration is inevitable; when child nurses pain goes from 
nipple to all over body (goes to back, Crot. t.; to uterus, Puls., Sil.). 
Mammary abscess; fistulae, gaping, angry ulcers; pus sanious, 
ichorous, fetid; unhealthy. Tumefied breast neither heals nor 
suppurates, is of a purple hue and "hard as old cheese" (Bry., Lac 
c., Phel.). Nipples, sensitive, sore, fissured (Graph.); < intensely by 
nursing, pain radiates over whole body. Hastens suppuration (Hep., 
Lach., Mer., Sil.).
Relations. - Compare: Kali i., its analogue.
Aggravation. - When it rains: exposure to damp, cold weather.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Picric Acid.
HC6H2(NO2)3O.
Is often restorative of a wasted and worn-out system; a fair picture 
of "nervous prostration" (Kali p.). Progressive, pernicious, 
anaemia; neurasthenia. Brain fag: of literary or business people; 
slightest excitement, mental exertion or overwork brings on 
headache, and causes burning along the spine (Kali p.). Headache: 
of students, teachers and overworked business men; from grief or 
depressing emotions; in occiputal-cervical region (Nat. m., Sil.); < 
or brought on by slightest motion or mental exertion. Priapism, 
with spinal disease; erections; satyriasis (Canth., Phos.). Small 
boils in any part of body, but especially in external auditary canal. 
Burning along spine and great weakness of spine and back; 
softening of cord (Phos., Zinc.). Weariness, progressing from a 
slight feeling of fatigue on motion to complete paralysis. Tired 
heavy feeling all over body, especially of limbs, < on exertion.
Relations. - Compare: Arg. n., Gels., Kali p., Phos ac., Phos., 
Petr., Sil.
Amelioration. - From cold air and cold water.
Aggravation. - Least mental exertion; motion; study; wet weather.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Platina.
Adapted to women, dark hair, rigid fibre; thin, of a sanguine 
temperament; who suffer from too early and too profuse menses. 
Sexual organs exceedingly sensitive; cannot bear the napkin to 
touch her; will go into spasms from an examination; vulva 
painfully sensitve during coitus: will faint during or cannot endure, 
coitus (compare, Mur., Orig.). The pains increase gradually and as 
gradually decrease (Stan.); are attended with numbness of parts 
(Cham.). For hysterical patients; alternately gay and sad, who cry 
easily (Croc., Ign., Puls.); pale, easily fatigued. Arrogant, proud, 
contemptuous and haughty; pitiful "looking down" upon people 
usully venerated; a kind of "casting them off" unwillingly. Mental 
delusions, as if everything about her were small; all persons 
physically and mentally inferior, but she physically large and 
superior. Sensation of growing larger in every direction. Trifling 
things produce profound vexation (Ign., Staph.); remains a long 
time in the sulks. Satiety of life, with taciturnity and fear of death 
(Acon., Ars.). Mental symptoms appear as physical symptoms 
disappear and vice versa. Headache: numb, heavy pain in brain or 
on vertex; from anger or chagrin; hysterical, from uterine disease; 
pains gradually increase and decrease. Nymphomania: < in lying-
in women; excessive sexual development, especially in virgins 
(Kali p.); vaginismus, spasms and constriction. Menses too early, 
too profuse, too long-lasting; dark-clotted, offensive, with bearing 
down spasms; pains in uterus with twitching; genitals sensitive. 
Excessive itching in uterus; pruritis vulvae. Constipation; while 
traveling (at sea, Bry.); after lead poisoning; from inertia of 
bowels; frequent, unsuccessful urging; stools adhere to rectum and 
anus like soft clay (Alum.); of emigrants; of pregnancy; obstinate 
cases after Nux has failed. Metrorrhagia: flow in black clots and 
fluid; thick black, tarry or in grumous mass (Croc.).
Relations. - Compare: Aur., Croc., Ign., Kali p., Puls., Sep., Stan.; 
Val. the vegetable analogue.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Plumbum.
Lead. (The Metal.)
Adapted to diseases from spinal origin (Phos., Pic. ac., Zinc.). 
Excessive and rapid emaciation; general or partial paralysis; 
extreme, with anaemia and great weakness. Muscular atrophy from 
scelorisis of spinal system. Lassitude; faints on going into a room 
full of company. Slow of perception; intellectual topor, gradually 
increasing apathy (in fevers, Phos. ac.). Weakness or loss of 
memory; unable to find the proper word (Anac., Lac c.). Delirium 
alternating with colic. Assumes strangest attitudes and positions in 
bed. Complexion: pale, ash-colored, yellow, corpse-like cheeks 
sunken; expressive of great anxiety and suffering. Skin of face, 
greasy, shiny (Nat. m., Sanic.). Distinct blue line along margin of  
gums; gums swollen, pale, show a lead-colored line. Excessive 
pain in abdomen, radiating to all parts of body. Sensation in 
abdomen at night, which causes patient to stretch violently for 
hours; must stretch in every direction (Amyl. n.). Violent colic, 
sensation as if abdominal wall was drawn as if by a string to 
the spine. Intussusception, with colic and faecal vomiting; 
strangulated hernia, femoral, inguinal or umbilical. Constipation: 
stools hard, lumpy, black like sheep-dung (Chel., Op.); with urging 
and terrible pain from spasm of anus; obstructed evacuation from 
indurated faeces, dryness of the excretions, paralysis or muscular 
atony; during pregnancy; from impaction of faeces; when Platina 
fails. Bright's disease: colic pain; abdomen retracted; rapid 
emaciation; excessive debility; contracted kidney. Feels a lack of 
room for foetus in uterus; inability of uterus to expand; threatening 
abortion. Spasm: clonic; tonic; from cerebral sclerosis or tumor; 
epilepsy or epileptiform convulsions. Yellow skin: dark brown 
"liver spots" in climacteric years; jaundice, the eyes, skin and urine 
yellow.
Relations. - Compare: Alum., Plat., Op., in colic; Pod. in retraction 
of navel; Nux in strangulated hernia; Pod. the vegetable analogue. 
The bad effects of Plumbum are antidoted by Alum., Petr., Plat., 
Sulph. ac., Zinc.
Aggravation. - At night (pains in limbs).
Amelioration. - Rubbing; hard pressure.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Podophyllum.
May Apple. (Berberidaceae)
Adapted to persons of bilious temperament who suffer from 
gastro- intestinal derangement, especially after abuse of mercury; 
"bilious attacks.". Thirst for large quantities of cold water (Bry.). 
Pains: sudden shocks of jerking pains. Depression of spirits, 
imagines he is going to die or be very ill (Ars.); disgust for life. 
Headache alternates with diarrhoea (Aloe); headache in winter, 
diarrhoea in summer. Painless cholera morbus; cholera infantum 
(Phyt.). Violent cramps in feet, calves, thighs, watery, painless 
stools. Difficult dentition: moaning, grinding the teeth at night; 
intense desire to press the gums together (Phyt.); head hot and 
rolling from side to side (Bell., Hell.). Diarrhoea: of long standing; 
early in morning, continues through forenoon, followed by natural 
stool in evening (Aloe), and accompanied by sensation of 
weakness or sinking in abdomen or rectum. Diarrhoea of children: 
during teething; after eating; while being bathed or washed; of  
dirty water soaking napkin through (Benz. ac.); with gagging. 
Stool: green, watery, fetid, profuse (Calc.); gushing out (Gamb., 
Jat., Phos.); chalk-like, jelly-like (Aloe); undigested (Cinch., Ferr.); 
yellow meal-like sediment; prolapse of rectum before or with stool. 
Prolapsus uteri: from overlifting or straining; from constipation; 
after parturition; with subinvolution. In early months of pregnancy, 
can lie comfortably only on stomach (Acet. ac.). Patient is 
constantly rubbing and shaking the region of liver with his hand. 
Fever paroxysm at 7 a. m. with great loquacity during chill and 
heat; sleep during perspiration. Affects right throat, right ovary, 
right hypochondrium (Lyc.). Pain and numbness in right ovary, 
running down thigh of that side (Lil.). Suppressed menses in young 
girls (Puls., Tub.).
Relations. - Compare: Aloe, Chel., Collin., Lil., Merc., Nux, 
Sulph. It antidoes the bad effects of mercury. After: Ipec., Nux, in 
gastric affections; after Calc. and Sulph. in liver diseases.
Aggravation. - In early morning (Aloe, Nux, Sulph.); in hot 
weather; during dentition.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Psorinum.
A Product of Psora. (A Nosode.)
Especially adapted to the psoric constitution. In chronic cases 
when well selected remedies fail to relieve or permanently improve 
(in acute diseases, Sulph.); when Sulphur seems indicated by fails 
to act. Lack of reaction after severe acute diseases. Appetite will 
not return. Children are pale, delicate, sickly. Sick babies will not 
sleep day or night, but worry, fret cry (Jalap.); child is good, plays 
all day; restless, troublesome, screaming all night (rev. of Lyc.). 
Great weakness and debility; from loss of animal fluids; remaining  
after acute diseases; independent of or without any organic lesion, 
or apparent cause. Body has a filthy smell, even after bathing. The 
whole body painful, easily sprained and injured. Great 
sensitiveness to cold air or change of weather; wears a fur cap, 
overcoat or shawl even in hottest summer weather. Stormy weather 
he feels acutely; feels restless for days before or during a 
thunderstorm (Phos.); dry scaly eruptions disappear in summer,  
return in winter. Ailments: from suppressed itch or other skin 
diseases, when Sulphur fails to relieve; sever, from even slight 
emotions. Feels unusually well day before attack. Extremely psoric 
patients; nervous, restless, easily startled. All excretions - 
diarrhoea, leucorrhoea, menses, perspiration - have a carrion-like 
odor. Anxious, full of fear; evil forebodings. Religious 
melancholy; very depressed, sad suicidal thoughts; despairs of 
salvation (Mel.), of recovery. Despondent: fears he will die; that he 
will fail in business; during climaxis; making his own life and that 
of those about him intolerable. Driven to despair with excessive 
itching. Headache: preceded, by flickering before eyes, by dimness 
of vision or blindness (Lac d., Kali bi.); by spots or rings. 
Headache: always hungry during; >while eating (Anac., Kali p.); 
from suppressed eruptions, or suppressed menses; > nosebleed 
(Mel.). Hair, dry, lustreless, tangles easily, glues together (Lyc.). 
Plica polonica (Bar., Sars., Tub.). Scalp: dry, scaly or moist, fetid, 
suppurating eruptions; oozing a sticky, offensive fluid (Graph., 
Mez.). Intense photophobia, with inflamed lids; cannot open the 
eyes; lies with face buried in pillow. Ears: humid scurfs and 
soreness on and behind ears; oozing and offensive viscid fluid 
(Graph.). Otorrhoea: thin, ichorous, horribly fetid discharge, like 
decayed meat; chronic, after measles or scarlatina. Acne: all forms, 
simplex, rosacea; < during menses, from coffee, fats, sugar, meat; 
when the best selected remedy fails or only palliates. Hungry in  
the middle of night; must have something to eat (Cina, Sulph.). 
Eructations tasting of rotten eggs (Arn., Ant. t., Graph.). Quinsy, 
tonsils greatly swollen; difficult, painful swallowing; burns, feels 
scalded; cutting, tearing, intense pain to ears on swallowing 
(painless, Bar. c.); profuse, offensive saliva; tough mucus in throat, 
must hawk continually. To not only > acute attack but eradicate 
the tendency. Hawks up cheesy balls, size of pea, of disgusting 
taste and carrion-like odor (Kali m.). Diarrhoea: sudden, 
imperative (Aloe, Sulph.); stool watery, dark brown, fetid; smells  
like carrion; involuntary, < at night from 1 to 4 a. m.; after severe 
acute diseases; teething; in children; when weather changes. 
Constipation: obstinate, with backache: from inactivity of rectum; 
when Sulphur fails to relieve. Enuresis: from vesical paresis; 
during full moon, obstinate cases, with a family history of eczema. 
Chronic gonorrhoea of year's duration that can neither be 
suppressed nor cured; the best selected remedy fails. Leucorrhoea: 
large, clotted lumps of an intolerable odor; violent pains in sacrum; 
debility; during climaxis. During pregnancy: most obstinate 
vomiting, foetus moves too violently; when the best selected 
remedy fails to relieve; to correct the psoric diathesis of the 
unborn. Profuse perspiration after acute diseases, with relief of all  
suffering (Calad., Nat. m.). Asthma, dyspnoea: < in open air, 
sitting up (Laur.); > lying down and keeping arms stretched far 
apart (rev. of Ars.); despondent, thinks he will die. Cough returns 
every winter. Hay fever: appearing regularly every year the same 
day of the month; with an asthmatic, psoric or eczematous history. 
Patient should be treated the previous winter to eradicate the 
diathesis and prevent summer attack. Cough: after suppressed itch, 
or eczema; chronic, of years' duration; < mornings on waking and 
evenings on lying down (Phos., Tub.); sputa green, yellow or salty 
mucus; pus-like; coughs a long time before expectorating. Skin: 
abnormal tendency to receive skin diseases (Sulph.); eruptions 
easily suppurate (Hep.); dry, inactive, rarely sweats; dirty look, as 
if never washed; coarse, greasy, as if bathed in oil; bad effects 
from suppression by sulphur and zinc ointments. Sleepless from 
intolerable itching, or frightful dreams of robbers, danger, etc (Nat. 
m.). Psorinum should not be given for psora or the psoric diathesis, 
but like every other remedy, upon a strict individualization - the 
totality of the symptoms - and then we realize its wonderful work.
Relations. - Sulphur and Tuberculinum. Is followed well: by, 
Alum., Bor., Hep., Sulph., Tub. After: Lactic ac., in vomiting of 
pregnancy. After: Arn in traumatic affections of ovaries. Sulphur 
follows Psorinum well in mammary cancer. Whether derived from 
purest gold or purest filth, our gratitude for its excellent service, 
forbids us to enquire or care. - J. B. Bell.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Pulsatilla.
Anemone. (Ranunculaceae)
Adapted to persons of indecisive, slow, phelgmatic temperament; 
sandy hair, blue eyes, pale face, easily moved to laughter or tears; 
affectionate, mild, gentle, timid, yielding disposition - the woman's 
remedy. Weeps easily: almost impossible to detail her ailments 
without weeping (weeps when thanked, Lyc.). Especially, in 
diseases of women and children. Women inclined to be fleshy, 
with scanty and protracted menstruation (Graph.). The first serious 
impairment of health is referred to puberic age, have "never been 
well since" - anaemia, chlorosis, bronchitis, phthisis. Secretions 
from all mucus membranes are thick, bland and yellowish- green 
(Kali s., Nat. s.). Symptoms ever changing: no two chills, no two 
stools, no two attacks alike; very well one hour, very miserable the 
next; apparently contradictory (Ign.). Pains: drawing, tearing, 
erratic, rapidly shifting from one part to another (Kali bi., Lac c., 
Mang. a.); are accompanied with constant chilliness; the more 
severe the pain, the more severe the chill; appear suddenly, leave 
gradually, or tension much increases until very acute and then "lets 
up with a snap;" on first motion (Rhus). Thirstlessness with nearly  
all complaints; gastric difficulties from eating rich food, cake, 
pastry, especially after pork or sausage; the sight or even the 
thought of port causes disgust; "bad taste" in the morning. Great 
dryness of mouth in the morning, without thirst (Nux m. - mouth 
moist, intense thirst, Mer.). Mumps; metastasis to mammae or 
testicle. "All-gone" sensation in stomach, in tea drinkers 
especially. Diarrhoea: only, or usually at night, watery, greenish-
yellow, very changeable; soon as they eat; from fruit, cold food or 
drinks, ice-cream (Ars., Bry.; eating pears, Ver., China; onions, 
Thuja; oysters, Brom., Lyc.; milk, Cal., Nat. c., Nic., Sul.; drinking 
impure water, Camp., Zing.). Derangements at puberty; menses, 
suppressed from getting feet wet; too late, scanty, slimy, painful, 
irregular, intermitting flow, with evening chilliness; with intense 
pain and great restlessness and tossing about (Mag. p.); flows more 
during day (on lying down, Kreos.). Delayed first menstruation. 
Sleep: wide awake in the evening, does not want to go to bed; first 
sleep restless, sound asleep when it it time to getup; wakes languid, 
unrefreshed (rev. of, Nux). Styes: especially on upper lid; from 
eating fat, greasy, rich food or pork (compare, Lyc., Sulph.). 
Threatened abortion; flow ceases and then returns with increased 
force; pains spasmodic, excite suffocation and fainting; must have 
fresh air. Toothache: relieved by holding cold water in the mouth 
(Bry., Coff.); worse from warm things and heat of room. Unable to 
breathe well, or is chilly in a warm room. Nervousness, intensely 
felt about the ankles.
Relations. - Complementary: Kali m., Lyc., Sil., Sulph. ac.; Kali 
m. is its chemical analogue. Silicea is the chronic of Pulsatilla in 
nearly all ailments. Follows, and is followed by, Kali m. One of the 
best remedies with which to begin the treatment of a chronic case 
(Cal., Sulph.). Patients, anaemic or chlorotic, who have taken 
much iron, quinine and tonics, even years before. Ailments: from 
abuse of chamomile, quinine, mercury, tea-drinking, sulphur.
Aggravation. - In a warm close room; evening, at twilight; on 
beginning to move; lying on the left, or on the painless side; very 
rich, fat, indigestible food; pressure on the well side if it be made 
toward the diseased side; warm applications; heat (Kali m.).
Amelioration. - In the open air; lying on painful side (Bry.); cold 
air or cool room; eating or drinking cold things; cold applications 
(Kali m.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Pyrogen.
A Product of Sepsis. (A Nosode.)
For sapraemia or septicemia; puerperal or surgical from ptomaine 
or sewer gas infection; during course of diphtheria, typhoid or 
tyhpus; when the best selected remedy fails to > or permanently 
improve. The bed feels hard (Arn.); parts lain on feel sore and 
bruised (Bapt.); rapid decubitus (Carb. ac.). Great restlessness; 
must move constantly to > the soreness of parts (Arn., Eup.). 
Tongue: large, flabby; clean, smooth as if varnished; fiery red; 
dry, cracked, articulation difficult (Crot., Ter.). Taste: sweetish;  
terribly fetid; pus-like; as from an abscess. Vomiting: persistent; 
brownish, coffee-ground; offensive, stercoraceous; with impacted 
or obstructed bowels (Op., Plb.). Diarrhoea: horribly offensive 
(Psor.); brown or black (Lep.); painless, involuntary; uncertain, 
when passing flatus (Aloe, Olean.). Constipation: with complete 
inertia (Op., Sanic.); obstinate from impaction, in fevers; stool, 
large, black, carrion-like; small black balls, like olives (Op., 
Plb.).[sheep dung?] Foetus: or secundines retained, decomposed; 
dead for days, black; horribly offensive discharge: "never well 
since" septic fever, following abortion or confinement. To arouse 
vital activity of uterus. Lochia: thin, acrid, brown, very fetid (Nit. 
ac.); suppressed, followed by chills, fever and profuse fetid 
perspiration. Distinct consciousness of a heart: it feels tired; as if 
enlarged; purring, throbbing, pulsating, constant in ears, preventing 
sleep; cardiac asthenia from septic conditions. Pulse abnormally  
rapid, out of all proportion to temperature (Lil.). Skin; pale, cold, 
of an ashy hue (Sec.); obstinate, varicose, offensive ulcers of old 
persons (Psor.). Chill: begins in the back, between scapulae; 
severe, general, of bones and extremities; marking onset of septic 
fever; temperature 103 to 106; head sudden, skin dry and burning; 
pulse rapid, small, wiry, 140 to 170; cold clammy sweat follows. 
In septic fevers, especially puerperal, Pyrogen has demonstrated its 
great value as a homeopathic dynamic antiseptic.
Relations. - Compare: Ars., Carbo v., Carb. ac., Op., Psor., Rhus, 
Sec., Ver. Latent pyogenic process, patient continually relapsing 
after apparent simillimum.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Ranunculus Bulbosus.
Buttercup. (Ranunculaceae.)
One of our most effective remedies for the bad effects of alcoholic  
beverages; spasmodic hiccough; delirium tremens. Day blindness; 
mist before eyes; pressure and smarting in eyeballs (Phos.). 
Muscular pains about margins of shoulder blades in women of 
sedentary employment, often burning in small spots (Agar., Phos.); 
from needle- work, typewriting, piano playing (Act.). Pains: 
stitches, sharp, shooting, neuralgic, myaligic or rheumatic in walls  
of chest, coming in paroxysms; excited or brought on by 
atmospheric changes; inflammatory; depending upon spinal 
irritation (Agar.). Pleurisy or pneumonia from sudden exposure to 
cold, while overheated, or vice versa (Acon., Arn.). Corns sensitive 
to touch, smart, burn (Salic. ac.). Intercostal rheumatism; chest 
sore, bruised, < from touch, motion or turning the body (Bry.); 
in wet, stormy weather (Rhus). Shingles: preceded or followed by 
intercostal neuralgia (Mez.); vesicles may have a bluish 
appearance.
Relations. - Compare: Acon., Arn., Bry., Clem., euphorb., Mez. 
Incompatible: with Sulph. and Staph.
Aggravation. - Contact: motion; atmospheric changes, especially, 
wet stormy weather (Rhus).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ratanhia.
Rhatany. (Polygalaceae.)
Terrible toothache during early months of pregnancy; tooth feels 
elongated; < lying, compelling to rise and walk about. 
Constipation: stool hard with great straining; protrusion of 
haemorrhoids followed by long lasting aching and burning in anus 
(Sulph.); bowels inactive; pain after stool as if splinters of glass 
were sticking in anus and rectum (Thuja). Excruciating pains after 
stool; burning after soft stool (Nit. ac.). Fissures of anus, great 
sensitiveness of rectum. Fissures of nipples in nursing women 
(Graph., Sep.).
Relations. - Compare: Canth., Carb. ac., Iris, Sulph., Thuja.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Rheum.
Rhubarb. (Polygonaceae)
Suitable for children, especially during dentition. Sour smell of 
the whole body; child smells sour, even after washing or 
bathing (Hep., Mag. c.). Screaming of children with urging and 
sour stools. Children cry and toss about all night (Psor.). Child 
impatient, desires many things, and cries; dislikes even favorite 
playthings (Cina, Staph.). Sweat of scalp, constant, profuse; 
whether asleep or awake, quiet or in motion, the hair is always wet; 
may or may not be sour (Cal., Sanic.). Difficult dentition; child 
restless, irritable, peevish, with pale face and sour smell (Kreos., 
Cham.). Desires various kinds of food but cannot eat them, become 
repugnant. Colic: < at once by uncovering an arm or leg; with 
every sour stool; < when standing; not > by stool.
Relations. - Complementary: after Magn. c., when milk disagrees 
and child has sour odor. Compare: Cham., Col., Hep., Ipec., Magn. 
c., Pod., Staph., Sulph. May be given after abuse of Magnesia with 
or without rhubarb, if stools are sour.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Rhododendron.
Snowrose. (Ericaceae)
Nervous persons who dread a storm and are particularly afraid of 
thunder; < before a storm, especially an electrical storm (Nat. c., 
Phos., Psor., Sil.). Toothache, every spring and fall during sharp 
east winds; worse from change of weather, thunderstorm, windy 
weather. Acute inflammatory swelling of joints, wandering from 
one joint to another; severe at night; < in rest and during rough 
stormy weather (Kalm.). Rheumatic drawing, tearing pains in all 
the limbs, worse at rest and in wet, cold windy weather (Rhus). 
Cannot get sleep or remain asleep unless legs are crossed. Gout 
with fibrous deposit in great toe-joint, rheumatic, often mistaken 
for bunion (Colch., Led.). Induration and swelling of the testicle 
after gonorrhoea or rheumatic exposure (Clem.); orchitis, sensation 
in gland as if it were being crushed (Aur., Cham.).
Relations. - Compare: Bry., Con., Cal., Led., Lyc., Sep., Rhus.
Aggravation. - Stormy, windy weather, electrical changes in the 
atmosphere; on approach of thunderstorm; symptoms reappear 
with rough weather.
Amelioration. - Better from wrapping the head warmly; dry heat 
and exercise.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Rhus Toxicodendron.
Poison Oak. (Anacardiaceae)
Adapted to persons of a rheumatic diathesis; bad effects of getting 
wet, especially after being overheated. Ailments: from spraining or 
straining a single part, muscle or tendon (Cal., Nux); overlifting, 
particularly from stretching high up to reach things; lying on damp 
ground; too much summer bathing in lake or river. Affects the 
fibrous tissue, especially (Rhod. - serous, Bry.); the right side more 
than the left. Pains: as if sprained; as if a muscle or tendon was 
torn from its attachment; as if bones were scrapped with a knife; 
worse after midnight and in wet, rainy weather; affected parts sore 
to touch. Lameness, stiffness and pain on first moving after rest, or 
on getting up in the morning, > by walking or continued motion. 
Great restlessness, anxiety, apprehension (Acon., Ars.); cannot 
remain in bed; must change position often to obtain relief from 
pain (from mental anxiety, Ars.). Restless, cannot stay long in one 
position. Back: pain between the shoulders on swallowing; pain 
and stiffness in small of back < sitting or lying, > by motion or 
lying on something hard. Great sensitiveness to open air; putting 
the hand from under the bed-cover brings on cough (Bar., Hep.). 
Muscular rheumatism, sciatica, left side (Col.); aching in left arm, 
with heart disease. Great apprehension at night; fears he will die of 
being poisoned; cannot remain in bed. Vertigo, when standing or 
walking; worse when lying down (better when lying down, Apis); 
< rising from lying, or stooping (Bry.). Headache: brain feels loose 
when stepping or shaking the head; sensation of swashing in brain; 
stupefying; as if torn; from beer; returns from least chagrin; < from 
sitting, lying, in cold, > warmth and motion. Dreams of great 
exertion; rowing, swimming, working hard at his daily occupation 
(Bry.). Corners of mouth ulcerated, fever blisters around mouth 
and on chin (Nat. m.). Tongue: dry; sore, red, cracked; triangular 
red tip; takes imprint of teeth (Chel., Pod.). Great thirst, with dry 
tongue, mouth and throat. External genitals inflamed, erisiplatous, 
oedematous. A dry, teasing cough, before and during chill, in 
intermittent fever; cough, with taste of blood. When acute diseases 
assume a typhoid form. Diarrhoea: with beginning typhoid; 
involuntary, with great exhaustion; tearing pain down the posterior 
part of limbs during stool. Paralysis: with numbness of affected 
parts; from getting wet on lying on damp ground; after exertion, 
parturition, sexual excesses, ague or typhoid; paresis of limbs; 
ptosis. Erysipelas, from left to right; vesicular, yellow vesicles; 
much swelling, inflammation; burning, itching, stinging.
Relations. - Complementary: to, Bryonia. Inimical: to, Apis, must 
not be used before or after. Compare: Arn., Bry., Rhod., Nat. s, 
Sulph.
Aggravation. - Before a storm; cold, wet rainy weather; at night, 
especially after midnight; from getting wet while perspiring; 
during rest.
Amelioration. - Warm, dry weather, wrapping up; warm or hot 
things; motion; change of position; moving affected parts. The 
great characteristic or Rhus is that with few exceptions the pains 
occur and are < during repose and are > by motion. Sepia, often 
quickly > itching and burning of Rhus, the vesciles drying up in a 
few days. Rhus is best antidoted by the simillimum; the potentized 
remedy given internally. The dermatitis should never be treated by 
topical medicated applications; they only suppress, never cure.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Rumex Crispus.
Yellow Dock. (Polygonaceae.)
For the tubercular diathesis, extremely sensitive skin and mucous 
membranes. Extremely sensitive to open air; hoarseness; worse 
evenings; after exposure to cold; voice uncertain. Tickling in  
throat pit, causing, dry, teasing cough. Dry, incessant, fatiguing 
cough; worse from changing air or room (Phos., Spong.); 
evening after lying down; touching or pressing the throat pit; lying 
on left side (Phos.); from slightest inhalation of cold air; covers 
head with bedclothes to make air warmer; little or no 
expectoration. The cough is < in cool air or by anything which 
increases the volume or rapidity of inspired air. Sensation of lump 
in throat; descends on swallowing, but returns immediately. Raw 
sensation in larynx and trachea when coughing (Caust.). Urine; 
involuntary with cough (Caust., Puls., Sil.). Early morning 
diarrhoea; from 5 to 10 a. m. (Aloe, Nat. s., Pod., Sulph.); stools 
painless, profuse, offensive; sudden urging, driving out of bed in 
morning. Skin: itching of various parts; < by cold, > by warmth; 
when undressing, uncovering or exposing to cold air (Hep., Nat. s., 
Olean.).
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Caust., Dros., Hyos., Phos., Sang., 
Sulph.
Aggravation. - Cool or cold air; lying down (Hyos.).
Amelioration. - Warmth; keeping mouth covered to exclude cold 
air.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Ruta Graveolens.
Rue. (Rutaceae.)
Scrofulous exostosis; bruises and other mechanical injuries of 
bones and periosteum; sprains; periostits; erysipelas; fractures, and 
especially dislocations (Symph.). Bruised lame sensatoin all over, 
as after a fall or blow; worse in limbs and joints (Arn.). All parts of 
the body upon which he lies are painful, as if bruised (Bap., Pyr.). 
Restless, turns and changes position frequently when lying (Rhus). 
Lameness after sprains, especially of wrists and ankles (chronic 
sprains, Bov., Stron.). Phthisis after mechanical injuries to chest 
(Mill.). Aching in and over eyes, with blurred vision, as if they had 
been strained. After using eyes at fine work, watchmaking, 
engraving (Nat. m.); looking intently (Sen.). Amblyopia or 
asthenopia from over-exertion of eyes or anamolies of refraction; 
from over-use in bad light; fine sewing, over-reading at night; 
misty, dim vision, with complete obscuration at a distance. Eyes 
burn, ache, feel strained; hot, like balls of fire; spasms of lower 
lids. Constipation; from inactivity, or impaction following 
mechanical injuries (Arn.). Prolapse of rectum, immediately on 
attempting a passage; from the slightest stooping; after 
confinement; frequent unsuccessful urging. Pressure on the bladder 
as if constantly full; continues after urinating; could hardly retain 
urine on account of urging, yet if not attended to it was difficult 
afterwards to void it; scanty green urine; involuntary. Warts; with 
sore pains; flat, smooth on palms of hands (Nat. c., Nat. m. - on 
back of hands, Dul.). Backache, relieved by lying on the back.
Relations. - Compare: Arn., Arg. n., Con., Euphr., Phyt., Rhus, 
Symph. After Arnica, it hastens the curative process in the joints; 
after Symphytum, in injuries to bones.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sabadilla.
Cevadilla. (Liliaceae)
Suited to persons of light hair, fair complexion with a weak, 
relaxed muscular system. Worm affections of children (Cina, Sil., 
Spig.). Nervous diseases; twitching, convulsive tremblings, 
catalepsy; from worms (Cina, Psor.). Illusions: that he is sick; parts 
shrunken; that she is pregnant when merely distended from flatus; 
that she has some horrible throat disease that will be fatal. 
Delirium during intermittents (Pod.). Sneezing: in spasmodic 
paroxysyms; followed by lachrymation; copious watery coryza; 
face hot and eyelids red and burning. Diphtheria, tonsillitis; can 
swallow warm food more easily; stitches and most symptoms, 
especially of throat, go from left to right (Lach., Lac. c.). Sensation 
of a skin hanging loosely in throat; must swallow over it. 
Headache: from too much thinking, too close application of 
attention (Arg. n.); from worms. Dryness of fauces and throat. 
Parchment-like dryness of skin.
Relations. - Compare: Col, Colch., Lyc., where < is from 4 to 8 p. 
m.; Puls., Sab. > in open air. Follows: Bry. and Ran. b. well in 
pleurisy, and has cured after Acon. and Bry. failed.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sabina.
Savine. (Coniferae.)
Chronic ailments of women; arthritic pains; tendency to 
miscarriages, especially at third month. Music is intolerable: 
produces nervousness, goes through bone and marrow (causes 
weeping Thuja). Drawing pains in small of back, from sacrum to 
pubes, in nearly all diseases (from back, going round the body to 
pubes, Vib. op.). Ailments: following abortion or premature labor; 
haemorrhage from uterus; flow partly pale red, partly clotted; 
worse from least motion (Sec.); often relieved by walking; pain 
extending from sacrum to pubes. Menses: too early, too profuse, 
too protracted; partly fluid, partly clotted (Fer.); in persons who 
menstruated very early in life; flow in paroxysym; with colic and 
labor-like pains; pains from sacrum to pubes. Discharge of blood 
between periods, with sexual excitement (Amb.). Retained 
placenta from atony of uterus; intense after-pains (Caul., Sec.). 
Menorrhagia: during climacteric, in women who formerly aborted; 
with early first menses. Inflammation of ovaries or uterus after 
abortion or premature labor. Promotes expulsion of moles or 
foreign bodies from uterus (Canth.). Fig warts with intolerable 
itching and burning; exuberant granulations (Thuja, Nit. ac.).
Relations. - Complementary: to, Thuja. Compare: Calc., Croc., 
Millef., Sec., Trill. Follows: Thuja in condyloma and sycotic 
affections.
Aggravation. - From least motion (Sec.); warm air or room (Apis, 
Puls.).
Amelioration. - In cool, open, fresh air.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sambucus Nigra.
Elder. (Caprifoliaceae.)
Adapted to diseases of scrofulous children, which affect the air 
passages specially. Persons formerly robust and fleshy, suddenly 
become emaciated (Iod., Tub.). Bad effects of violent mental 
emotions; anxiety, grief, or excessive sexual indulgence (Phos. ac., 
Kali p.). Oedmatous swelling in various parts of the body, 
especially in legs, instep and feet. Dry coryza of infants (sniffles); 
nose dry and completely obstructed, preventing breathing and 
nursing (Am. c., Nux). Dyspnoea: child awakens suddenly nearly 
suffocated, face livid, blue, sits up in bed; turns blue, gasps for 
breath, which it finally gets; attack passes off but is again repeated; 
child inspires but cannot expire (Chlorine, Meph.); sleeps into 
the attack (Lach.). Compare: Aurum drac. in Miller's asthma. 
Attacks of suffocation as in last stage of croup. Cough: suffocative, 
with crying children; worse about midnight; hollow, deep 
whooping, with spasm of chest; with regular inhalations but 
sighing exhalations. Cough deep, dry, precedes the fever 
paroxysm. Fever: dry heat while he sleeps; on falling asleep; after 
lying down; without thirst, dreads uncovering (must be covered in 
every stage, Nux). Profuse sweat over entire body during waking 
hours; on going to sleep, dry heat returns (sweats as soon as he 
closes his eyes to sleep, Cinch., Con.).
Relations. - Compare: Cinch., Chlor., Ipec., Meph., Sulph. 
Relieves ailments from abuse of Arsenicum. Compare: Aurum 
drac. in Miller's asthma. Follows well: after, Opium, in bad effects 
of fright.
Aggravation. - During rest; after eating fruit.
Amelioration. - Sitting up in bed. Motion; most of the pains occur 
during rest and disappear during motion (Rhus).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sanguinaria.
Bloodroot. (Papaveraceae.)
The periodical sick headache; begins in morning, increases during 
the day, lasts until evening; head feels as if it would burst, or as if 
eyes would be pressed out; relieved by sleep. American sick 
headache, > by perfect quiet in a dark room ("tired headache" from 
over mental or physical exertion, epigea; sick headache < during 
rest > by rubbing, pressure, motion, Indigo). Headache begins in  
occiput, spreads upwards and settles over right eye (Sil., - over or 
in left orbit, Spig.). Headaches, return at the climacteric; every 
seventh day (Sabad., Sil., Sulph. - eight day, Iris). Neuralgia of 
face > by kneeling down and pressing the head firmly against the 
floor; pain extends in all directions from the upper jaw. 
Circumscribed red cheeks in afternoon; burning in ears; in 
bronchitis, pneumonia, phthisis. Rheumatic pain in the right arm 
and shoulder (left, Fer.); cannot raise the arm, < at night. Pains in 
places where the bones are least covered, as tibia, backs of hands, 
etc (Rhus ven.). Burning in pharynx and oesophagus. Laryngeal or 
nasal polypi (Sang. n., Psor., Tuec.). Climacteric ailments: flushes 
of heat and leucorrhoea; burning of palms and soles; compelled to 
throw off bedclothes; painful enlargement of breasts; when 
Lachesis and Sulphur fail to relieve. Asthma after the "rose cold," 
< from odors. Cough: dry, waking him at night and not ceasing 
until he sits up in bed and passes flatus; circumscribed red cheeks; 
night sweats; diarrhoea. Severe cough after whooping-cough; the 
cough returns every time patient takes cold. Eruption on face of 
young women, especially during scanty menses (Bellis, Cal., Eug. 
j., Psor.).
Relations. - Compare: Bell., Iris, Mellil., in sick headache; Lach., 
Sulph., Ver. v., in chronic bronchitis or latent pneumonia. After 
Bell. fails in scarlatina. As a dynamic remedy for the narcosis of 
Opium.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sanicula.
Mineral Spring Water. (Ottawa, Ill.)
Dread of downward motion (Bor.). Child headstrong, obstinate, 
cries and kicks; cross, irritable, quickly alternates with laughter; 
does not want to be touched. Constantly changing his occupation. 
Head and neck of children sweat profusely during sleep; wets the 
pillow far around (Cal., Sil.). Profuse, scaly dandruff on scalp, 
eyebrows, in the beard. Soreness behind ears with discharge of 
while, gray, viscid fluid (Graph., Psor.). Tongue: large, flabby; 
burning, must protrude it to keep it cool; ring- worm on tongue 
(Nat. m.). Nausea and vomiting from car or carriage riding. Thirst; 
drinks little and often; is vomited soon as it reaches the stomach 
(Ars., Phos.). Symptoms constantly changing (Lac. c., Puls.). 
Incontinence of urine and faeces; sphincter unreliable (Aloe); 
urging from flatus, must cross legs to prevent faeces from 
escaping. Constipation: no desire until a large accumulation; after 
great straining stool partially expelled, recedes (Sil., Thuja); large 
evacuation of small dry, gray balls, must be removed mechanically 
(Sel.). Stool: hard, impossible to evacuate; of grayish-white balls, 
like burnt lime; crumbling from verge of anus (Mag. m.); with the 
odor of limburger cheese. Diarrhoea: changeable in character and 
color; like scrambled eggs; frothy, grass-green, turns green on 
standing; like scum of a frog pond; after eating, must hurry from 
table. The odor of stool follows despite bathing (Sulph.). 
Excoriation of skin about anus (Sulph.); covering perinueum and 
extending to genitals. Leucorrhoea with strong odor of fish brine 
(oozing from rectum smelling like herring brine, Cal.; fish brine 
discharge from ear, Tel.). Weakness, bearing down as if contents 
of pelvis would escape; < walking, misstep, or jar, > by rest, lying 
down; desire to support parts by placing hand against uvula (Lil., 
Mur.); soreness of uterus. Foot sweat: between the toes, making 
them sore; offensive (Graph., Psor., Sil.); on soles as if he had 
stepped in cold water. Burning of soles of feet; must uncover or 
put them in a cool place (Lach., Med., Sang., Sulph.). Child kicks 
off clothing even in coldest weather (Hep., Sulph.). Emaciation, 
progressive; child looks old, dirty, greasy and brownish; skin about 
neck wrinkled, hangs in folds (Abrot., Iod., Nat. m., Sars.).
Relations. - Related to: Abrot., Alum., Bor., Cal., Graph., Nat. m., 
Sil., and others of our great antipsorics.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sarsaparilla.
Wild Liquorice. (Smilaceae)
For dark-haired persons, lithic or sycotic diathesis. Great 
emaciation: skin becomes shriveled or lies in folds (Abrot., Iod., 
Nat. m., Sanic.). Headache and periosteal pains generally from 
mercury, syphilis or suppressed gonorrhoea. In children; face like 
old people; enlarged abdomen; dry, flabby skin (Bar. c., Op.). 
Herpetic eruptions on all parts of body; ulcers, after abuse of 
mercury, in syphillis. Rash from exposure to open air; dry, itch-
like eruptions, prone to appear in spring; become crusty. Severe, 
almost unbearable pain at conclusion of urination (Berb., Equis., 
Med., Thuja). Passage of gravel or small calculi; renal colic;  
stone in bladder; bloody urine. Urine: bright and clear but 
irritating; scanty, slimy, flaky, sandy, copious, passed without  
sensation (Caust.); deposits white sand. Painful distention and 
tenderness in bladder; urine dribbles while sitting, standing, passes 
freely; air passes from urethra. Sand in urine or on diaper; child 
screams before and while passing it (Bor., Lyc.). Gonorrhoea 
checked by cold, wet weather, or mercury, followed by 
rheumatism. Neuralgia or renal colic; excruciating pains from right 
kidney downwards (Lyc.). Intolerable stench on genital organs; 
fluid pollutions; bloody seminal emission (Led., Mer.). Retraction  
of nipples; nipples are small, withered, unexcitable (Sil.). 
Rheumatism, bone pains after mercury or checked gonorrhoea; 
pains < at night, in damp weather or after taking cold in water. 
Itching eruption on forehead during menses (Eug. j., Sang., Psor.). 
Rhagades: skin cracked on hands and feet; pain and burning 
particularly on sides of fingers and toes; skin hard, indurated.
Relations. - Complementary: Merc., Sep., either of which follows 
well. Compare: Berb., Lyc., Nat. m., Phos. Frequently called for 
after abuse of Mercury.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Secale Cornutum.
Spurred Rye; Ergot. (A Fungus; a Nosode.)
Adapted to women of thin, scrawny, feeble, cachetic appearance; 
irritable, nervous temperament; pale, sunken countenance. Very 
old, decrepit, feeble persons. Women of very lax muscular fibre; 
everything seems loose and open; no action; vessels flabby; 
passive haemorrhages, copious flow of thin, black, watery blood; 
the corpuscles are destroyed. Haemorrhagic diathesis; the slightest 
wound causes bleeding for weeks (Lach., Phos.); discharge of 
sanious liquid blood with a strong tendency to putrescence; 
tingling in the limbs and great debility, especially when the 
weakness is not caused by previous loss of fluids. Leucorrhoea; 
green, brown, offensive. Boils: small, painful with green contents, 
mature very slowly and heal in the same manner; very debilitating. 
Face: pale, pinched, ashy, sunken, hippocratic; drawn, with sunken 
eyes; blue rings around eyes. Unnatural, ravenous appetite; even 
with exhausting diarrhoea; craves acids, lemonade. Diarrhoea: 
profuse, watery, putrid, brown; discharged with great force 
(Gamb., Crot.); very exhausting; painless, involuntary; anus wide 
open (Apis, Phos.). Enuresis: of old people; urine pale, watery, or 
bloody; urine suppressed. Burning; in all parts of the body, as if 
sparks of fire were falling on the patient (Ars.). Gangrene; dry, 
senile, < from external heat. Large ecchymosis; blood blisters; 
often commencement of gangrene. Collapse in cholera diseases; 
skin cold, yet cannot bear to be covered (Camph.). The skin feels 
cold to the touch, yet the patient cannot tolerate covering; icy 
coldness of extremeties. Menses: irregular; copious, dark, fluid; 
with pressing, labor-like pains in abdomen; continuous discharge 
of watery blood until next period. Threatened abortion especially at 
third month (Sab.); prolonged, bearing down, forcing pains. During 
labor: pains irregular; too weak; feeble or ceasing; everything 
seems loose and open but no expulsive action; fainting. After 
pains: too long; too painful; hour-glass contraction. Suppression of 
milk; in thin, scrawny, exhausted women; the breasts do not 
properly fill. Pulse small, rapid, contracted and often intermittent.
Relations. - Compare: Cinnmon in post-partum haemorrhage; it 
increases labor-pains, controls profuse or dangerous flooding, is 
always safe, while Ergot is always dangerous. Similar: to, 
Arsenicum, but cold and heat are opposite. Resembles Colchicum 
in cholera morbus.
Aggravation. - Heat; warmth from covering, of all affected parts; 
in all diseases worse from heat.
Amelioration. - In the cold air; getting cold; uncovering affected 
parts; rubbing.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Selenium.
Selenium. (The Element.)
Adapted to light complexion; blondes; great emaciation of face, 
hands, legs and feet, or single parts. Very forgetful in business, but 
during sleep dreams of what he has forgotten. Headache: of 
drunkards; after debauchery; after lemonade, tea, wile; every 
afternoon. Hair falls off, on head, eyebrows, whiskers, genitals. 
Coryza ending in diarrhoea. Hungry: at night (Cina, Psor.); 
longing for spiritous liquors, an almost irresistible maniacal desire. 
Constipation: stool large, hard, impacted so that it requires  
mechanical aid (Aloe, Cal., Sanic., Sep., Sil.); after serious illness, 
especially enteric fevers. Urine: red, dark, scanty; coarse, red, 
sandy, sediment; involuntary dribbling while walking. Impotence, 
with desire; lewd thoughts, but physically impotent (sudden 
impotence, Chlor.). Erections slow, insufficient, too rapid emission 
with long-continued threill; weak, ill-humored after coitus, often 
involuntary dribbling of semen and prostatic fluid which oozes 
while sitting, at stool, during sleep; gleet (Calad.). Priapism, glans 
drawn up (Berb., - drawn down, Canth.). Aphonia: after long use 
of voice; husky when beginning to sing; obliged to clear the throat 
frequently of a transparent starchy mucus (Arg. m., Stan.); 
tubercular laryngitis. Weak, easily exhausted; from either mental 
or physical labor; after typhoid, typhus, debauchery. Irresistible 
desire to lie down and sleep; strength suddenly leaves him; 
especially in hot weather. Very great aversion to a draft of air 
either warm, cold or damp. After typhoid, great weakness of spine, 
fears paralysis. Emaciation of affected parts.
Relations. - Compare: Phos. in genito-urinary and respiratory 
symptoms; Arg. m. and Stan. in laryngitis of singers or speakers; 
Alum. hard stool, inactive rectum. Follows well: after, Calad, Nat., 
Staph., Phos. ac., in sexual weakness. Itch checked by Mercurials 
or Sulphur often requires Selenium.
Aggravation. - Draught of air; in the sun; from lemonade, tea or 
wine.
Amelioration. - Taking cold water or cold air into mouth.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Sepia.
Cuttle Fish. (Mollusca.)
Adapted to persons of dark hair, rigid fibre, but mild and easy 
disposition (Puls.). Diseases of women: especially those occurring 
during pregnancy, child- bed and lactation; or diseases attended 
with sudden prostration and sinking faintness (Murex, Nux m.); 
"the washerwoman's remedy." complaints that are brought on by or 
aggravated after laundry work. Pains extend from other parts to the 
back (rev. of Sab.); are attended with shuddering (with chilliness, 
Puls.). Particularly sensitive to cold air, "chills so easily;" lack of 
vital heat, especially in chronic diseases (in acute diseases, Led.). 
Sensation of a ball in inner parts; during menses, pregnancy, 
lactation; with constipation, diarrhoea, haemorrhoids, leucorrhoea 
and all uterine affections. Faints easily: after getting wet; from 
extremes of heat or cold; riding in a carriage; while kneeling at 
church. Coldness of the vertex with headache (Ver. - heat of 
vertex, Calc., Graph., Sulph.). Anxiety: with fear, flushes of heat 
over face and head; about real or imaginary friends; with uterine 
troubles. Great sadness and weeping. Dread of being alone; of 
men; of meeting friends; with uterine troubles. Indifferent: even to 
one's family; to one's occupation (Fl. ac., Phos. ac.); to those whom 
she loves best. Greedy, miserly (Lyc.). Indolent: does not want to 
do anything, either work or play; even an exertion to think. 
Headache: in terrific shocks; at menstrual nisus, with scanty flow; 
in delicate, sensitive, hysterical women; pressing, bursting < 
motion, stooping, mental labor, > by external pressure, continued 
hard motion. Great falling of the hair, after chronic headaches or at 
the climacteric. Yellowness: of the face; conjunctiva; yellow spots 
on the chest; a yellow saddle across the upper part of the cheeks 
and nose; a "tell tale face" of uterine ailments. All the coverings of 
the neck felt too tight and were constantly loosened (Lach.). 
Herpes circinatus in isolated spots on upper part of body (in 
intersecting rings over whole body, Tell.). Pot-belliness of mothers 
(of children, Sulph.). Painful sensation of emptiness, "all-gone" 
feeling in the epigastrium, relieved by eating (Chel., Mur., Phos.). 
Tongue foul, but becomes clear at each menstrual nisus, returns 
when flow ceases; swelling and cracking of lower lip. 
Constipation: during pregnancy (Alum.); stool hard, knotty, in 
balls, insufficient, difficult; pain in rectum during and long after 
stool (Nit. ac., Sulph.); sense of weight or ball in anus, not > by 
stool. Urine: deposits in a reddish clay-colored sediment which 
adheres to the vessel as if it has been burned on; fetid, so offensive 
must be removed from the room (horribly offensive after standing, 
Indium). Enuresis: bed is wet almost as soon as the child goes to 
sleep (Kreos.); always during the first sleep. Gleet: painless, 
yellowish, staining linen; meatus glued together in morning; 
obstinate, of long standing (Kali iod.); sexual organs, weak and 
exhausted. Violent stitches upward in the vagina; lancinating pains 
from the uterus to the umbilicus. Prolapsus of uterus and vagina; 
pressure and bearing down as if everything would protrude 
from pelvis; must cross limbs tightly to "sit close" to prevent it; 
with oppression of breathing (compare Agar., Bell., Lil., Murex, 
Sanic.). Irregular menses of nearly every form - early, late, scanty, 
profuse, amenorrhoea or menorrhagia - when associated with the 
above named symptoms. Morning sickness of pregnancy: the sight 
or thought of food sickens (Nux); the smell of cooking food 
nauseates (Ars., Coch.). Dyspnoea: < sitting, after sleep, in room, > 
dancing or walking rapidly. Erythism; flushes of heat from least 
motion; with anxiety and faintness; followed by perspiration over 
whole body; climacteric (Lach., Sang., Sulph., Tub.); ascends, 
from pelvic organs. Itching of skin; of various parts; of external 
genitalia; is > scratching; and is apt to change to burning (Sulph.).
Relations. - Complementary: Natrum mur. Inimical: to, Lach., 
should not be used before or after; to, Puls, with which it should 
never be alternated. Similar: to, Lach., Sang., Ustil., in climacteric 
irregularities of the circulation. Frequently indicated after: Sil., 
Sulph. A single dose often acts curatively for many weeks.
Aggravation. - In afternoon or evening; from cold air or dry east 
wind; sexual excesses; at rest; sultry moist weather; before a 
thunderstorm (Psor.).
Amelioration. - Warmth of bed, hot applications; violent exercise. 
Many symptoms, especially those of head, heart and pelvis, are 
both < and > by rest and exercise. It antidotes mental effects of 
overuse of tabacco, in patients of sedentary habits who suffer from 
over-mental exertion.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Silicea.
Pure Silica. (Silicic Oxide)
Adapted to the nervous, irritable, sanguine temperament; persons 
of a psoric diathesis. Persons of light complexion; find, dry, skin; 
pale face; weakly, with lax muscles. Constitutions which suffer 
from deficient nutrition, not because food is lacking in quality or in 
quantity, but from imperfect assimilation (Bar. c., Calc.); 
oversensitive, physically and mentally. Scrofulous, rachitic 
children with large heads; open fontanelles and sutures; much 
sweating about the head (lower than Cal.) which must be kept 
warm by external covering (Sanic.); distended abdomen; weak 
ankles; slow in learning to walk. Great weariness and debility; 
wants to lie down. Nervous debility; exhaustion with erythism; 
from hard work and close confinement; may be overcome by force 
of will. Restless, fidgety, starts at least noise. Anxious, yielding, 
fainthearted. Mental labor very difficult; reading and writing 
fatigue, cannot bear to think. Ailments: caused by suppressed foot-
sweat (Cup., Graph., Psor.); exposing the head or back to any 
slight draught of air; bad effects of vaccination, especially 
abscesses and convulsions (Thuja); chest complaints of 
stonecutters with total loss of strength. Want of vital heat, always 
chilly, even when taking active exercise (Led., Sep.). 
Inflammation, swelling and suppuration of glands, cervical, 
axillary, parotid, mammary, inguinal, sebaceous; malignant, 
gangrenous. Has a wonderful control over the suppurative process 
- soft tissue, periosteum or bone - maturing abscesses when desired 
or reducing excessive suppuration (affecting chiefly the soft 
tissues, Calend., Hep.). Children are obstinate, headstrong, cry 
when spoken kindly to (Iod.). Vertigo: spinal, ascending form back 
of neck to head; as if one would fall forward, from looking up 
(Puls., - looking down, Kal., Spig.). Chronic sick headaches, since 
some severe disease of youth (Psor.); ascending from nape of neck 
to the vertex, as if coming from the spine and locating in one eye, 
especially the right (left, Spig.); < draught of air or uncovering the 
head; > pressure and wrapping up warmly (Mag. m., Stron.); > 
profuse urination. Constipation: always before and during menses 
(diarrhoea before and during menses, Am. c., Bov.); difficult, as 
from inactivity of rectum; with great straining, as if rectum was 
paralyzed; when partly expelled, recedes again (Thuja). Faeces 
in ano alternates with chest symptoms (Berb., Cal. p.). Discharge 
of blood from vagina every time the child takes the breast 
(compare Crot. t.). Nipple is drawn in like a funnel (Sars.). Night 
walking; gets up while asleep, walks about and lies down again 
(Kali br.). Unhealthy skin; every little injury suppurates (Graph., 
Hep., Merc., Petr.). Crippled nails on fingers and toes (Ant. c.). 
Takes cold from exposure of feet (Con., Cup.). Sweat of hands, 
toes, feet and axillae; offensive. Intolerable, sour, carrion-like odor 
of the feet, without perspiration, every evening. Fistula lachymalis; 
ingrowing toe-nails (Mag. p. a., Mar. v.); panaritium; blood boils; 
carbuncles; ulcers of all kinds; fistulae, painful, offensive, high 
spongy edges, proud flesh in them; fissura ani; great pain after 
stool. Desire to be magnetized, which > (Phos.). Promotes 
expulsion of foreign bodies from the tissues; fish bones, needles, 
bone splinters.
Relations. - Complementary: Thuja, Sanicula. Compare: Hep., Pic. 
ac., Kali p., Hyper., Ruta., Sanic., Gettysburg. Follows well: after, 
Calc., Graph., Hep., Nit ac., Phos. Is followed well: by, Hep., 
Fluor. ac., Lyc., Sep.
Aggravation. - Cold; during menses; during new moon; 
uncovering, especially the head; lying down.
Amelioration. - Warmth, especially from wrapping up the head; 
all the symptoms except gastric, which are > by cold food (Lyc.). 
Silicea is the chronic of Pulsatilla.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Spigelia.
Pinkroot. (Loganiaceae.)
Adapted to anaemic debilitated subjects of rheumatic diathesis; to 
scrofulous children afflicted with ascarides and lumbrici (Cina, 
Stan.). Persons with light hair; pale, thin, bloated, weak; wrinkled, 
yellow, earthy skin. Body painfully sensitive to touch; part  
touched feels chilly; touch sends shudder through the whole frame 
(Kali c.). Afraid of sharp, pointed things, pins, needles, etc. 
Rheumatic affections of heart (Kali, Led., Naja); systolic blowing 
at apex. Aneurism. Nervous headache; periodical, beginning in 
morning at base of brain, spreading over the head and locating in 
eye, orbit and temple of left side (right side, Sang., Sil.); pain, 
pulsating, violent, throbbing. Headache; at sunrise, at its height at 
noon, declines till sunset. (Nat. m., Tab.). Intolerable, pressive  
pain in eyeballs; could not turn the eyes without turning the whole 
body; worse, especially on making a false step. Sensation: as if 
eyes were too large for the orbits (Act., Com.); sensitve to touch; 
as if a band around head (Cac., Carb. ac., Sulph.). Copious 
offensive mucus from posterior nares, drops into throat, causing 
choking at night (Hydr.). Sharp, stabbing, sticking pains through 
eyeballs back into the head; from cold, damp, rainy weather. 
Prosopalgia: periodical, left-sided, orbit, eyes, malar bone, teeth; 
from morning until sunset; pain tearing, burning, cheek dark red; 
during cold, rainy weather; from tea. Toothache from tobacco 
smoking; > only on lying down and while eating (Plan.); worse 
from cold air and water; returns from thinking about it. Scirrhus of 
sigmoid or rectum, atrocious unbearable pain (Alumen). 
Dyspnoea: must lie on right side ro with head high (Cac., Spong.); 
pains in chest are stitching, needle-like. Chest affections with 
stitching pains synchronous with pulse, < from motion, < cold, wet 
weather. Palpitation: violent, visible and audible; from least 
motion; when bending forward; systolic blowing at apex. 
Stammering, repeats first syllable three or four times; with 
abdominal ailments; with helminthiasis.
Relations. - Compare: Acon., Ars., Cact., Dig. Kali c., Naja, Kal., 
Spong. in heart affections.
Aggravation. - From motion, noise, touch, turning the eyes; from 
every shaking, commotion, or concussion.
Amelioration. - Lying on right side with the head high (Ars., Cac., 
Spong.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Spongia Tosta.
Roasted Sponge. (Spongia.)
For the tubercular diathesis. Especially adapted to diseases of 
children and women; light hair, lax fibre, fair complexion (Brom.). 
Swelling and induration of glands; goitre (Brom.). Awakens in 
fright and feels as if suffocating; as if head to breathe thru a 
sponge. Every mental excitement < or increases the cough. Worse 
after sleep or sleeps into < (Lach.). Sore throat, < after eating sweet 
things. Thyroid gland swollen even with chin: with suffocative 
paroxysyms at night. Goitre. Great dryness of mucous membranes 
of air passages - throat, larynx, trachea, bronchi - "dry as a horn.". 
Cough: dry, barking, croupy; rasping, ringing, wheezing, 
whistling; everything is perfectly dry, no mucous rale. Cough: dry,  
sibilant, like a saw driven through a pine board; < sweets, cold 
drinks, smoking, lying with head low, dry cold winds; < reading, 
singing, talking, swallowing; > eating or drinking warm things. 
Croup: anxious, wheezing, < during inspiration (< during 
expiration, Acon.); < before midnight (< before morning, Hep.). 
Palpitation: violent with pain and gasping respiration; awakened 
suddenly after midnight with suffocation and great anxiety; 
valvular insufficiency; before and during menses. Angina pectoris; 
contracting pain, heat, faintness, suffocation, anxiety and sweat; < 
after midnight. Spermatic cord swollen, painful; testicles swollen, 
bruised, squeezed; after suppressed gonorrhoea or maltreated 
orchitis.
Relations. - Spongia follows well: after, Acon., Hep., in cough and 
croup when dryness prevails; after Spong., Hep., when mucus 
commences to rattle. Compare: Arn., Caust., Iod., Lach., Nux m., 
sputa loosened but must be swallowed again.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Stannum. (Tin)
Tin. (The Element.)
Extreme exhaustion of mind and body. Sinking, empty, all-gone 
sensation in stomach (Chel., Phos., Sep.). Sad, despondent, feels  
like crying all the time, but crying makes her worse (Nat. m., Puls., 
Sep.); faint and weak, especially when going down stairs; can go 
up well enough (Bor., - rev. of Calc.). Headache or neuralgia; pains 
begin lightly and increase gradually to the highest point and then 
gradually decline (Plat.). Colic: > by hard pressure, or by laying 
abdomen across knee or on shoulder (Col.); lumbrici; passes 
worms. Menses; too early, too profuse; sadness before; pain in 
malar bones, during. Leucorrhoea; great debility; weakness seems 
to proceed from chest (from abdomen, pelvis, Phos., Sep.). 
Prolapsus, worse during stool (with diarrhoea, Pod.); so weak she 
drops into a chair instead of sitting down. While dressing in the 
morning has to sit down several times to rest. Nausea and 
vomiting; in the morning; from the odor of cooking food (Ars., 
Colch.). When singing or using the voice, aching and weakness in 
deltoid and arms. Great weakness in chest; < from talking, 
laughing, reading aloud, singing; so weak, unable to talk. Cough: 
deep, hollow, shattering, strangling; concussive, in paroxysms of 
three coughs (of two, Merc.); dry, while in bed, in evening; empty 
sensation in chest. Expectoration: profuse like the white of an egg; 
sweetish, salty (Kali i., sep.); sour, putrid, musty; yellow, green pus 
(heavy, green, salty, Kali i.); during the day. Hoarseness; deep, 
husky hollow voice; relieved for the time by coughing or 
expectorating mucus. Sweat: mouldy, musty odor; after 4 a. m. 
every morning; on neck and forehead; very debilitating.
Relations. - Complementary: Pulsatilla. Stannum follows well; 
after, Caust., and is followed by Cal., Phos., Sil., Sulph., Tub.
Aggravation. - Laughing and singing, talking, using the voice; 
lying on right side; drinking anything warm (from cold drinks, 
Spong.).
Amelioration. - Coughing or expectorating relieves hoarseness; 
hard pressure (Col.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Staphisagria.
Stavesacre. (Ranunculaceae.)
For the mental effects of onanism and sexual excesses. Very 
sensitive to slight mental impressions; least action or harmless 
words offend (Ign.). Great indignation about things done by others 
or by himself; grieves about consequences. Apathetic, indifferent, 
low-spirited, weak memory from sexual abuses (Anac., Aur., Nat., 
Phos. ac.). Ailments from pride, envy or chagrin. Ill-humored 
children cry for things which, after receiving, they petulantly push 
or throw away (Kreos.) [Cina, Bry.]. Was insulted; being too 
dignified to fight, subdued his wrath and went home sick, 
trembling and exhausted (the rev. of Nux). Sensation of a round 
ball in forehead sitting firmly there even when shaking the head. 
Mechanical injuries from sharp-cutting instruments; post-surgical  
operations; stinging, smarting, pains, like the cutting of a knife. 
For the bad effects of: onanism, sexual excesses, loss of vital 
fluids; chagrin, mortification, unmerited insults; indignation, with 
vexation or reserved displeasure (Aur.). Nervous weakness; as if 
one up after much hard work. Styes, chalazae on eyelids or upper 
lids, one after another, leaving hard nodosities in their wake (Con., 
Thuja). Toothache: during menses; sound as well as decayed teeth; 
painful to touch of food or drink; but not from biting or chewing; < 
drawing cold air into mouth; < from cold drinks and after eating. 
Teeth turn black, show dark streaks through them; cannot be kept 
clean; crumble; decay on edges (at the roots, Mez., Thuja); 
scorbutic cachexia. Craving for tobacco. Extreme hunger even 
when stomach is full of food. Sensation as if stomach and abdomen 
were hanging down relaxed (Agar., Ipec., Tab.). Colic: after 
lithotomy or ovariotomy; attending abdominal section (Bis., Hep.). 
Urging to urinate, has to sit at urinal for hours; in young married 
women; after coition; after difficult labor (Op.); burning in urethra 
when not urinating; urging and pain after urinating in prostatic 
troubles of old men; prolapse of bladder. Painful sensitiveness of 
sexual organs, vulva so sensitive can scarcely wear a napkin 
(Plat.). Onanism; persistently dwelling on sexual subjects; 
constantly thinking of sexual pleasures. Spermatorrhoea: with 
sunken features; guilty, abashed look; emission followed by 
headache, weakness; prostration and relaxation or atrophy of 
sexual organs. Cough: only in the daytime, or only after dinner, 
worse after eating meat; after vexation or indignation; excited by 
cleaning the teeth. Croupy cough in winter alternating with sciatica 
in summer; cough excited by tobacco smoke (Spong.). Backache, < 
at night in bed, and in the morning before rising. Arthritic 
nodosities of joints, especially of the fingers (Caul., Colch., Lyc.); 
inflammation of phalages with sweating and suppuration. Sleepy 
all day, awake all night; body aches all over. In fever; ravenous 
hunger for days before attack. Eczema: yellow, acrid moisture 
oozes from under crusts; now vesicles form from contact with 
exudation; by scratching one place itching ceases, but appears in 
another. Fig-warts: dry, pediculated, cauliflower-like; after abuse 
of mercury (Nit. ac., Sab., Thuja).
Relations. - Compare: Caust., Col., Ign., Lyc., Puls., Col. and 
Staph. act well after each other; Caust., Col., Staph., follow well in 
order names.
Aggravation. - Mental affections; from anger, indignation, grief, 
mortification; loss of fluids; tobacco; onanism; sexual excesses; 
from the least touch on affected parts. Inimical: Ran. bulb., either 
before or after.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Stramonium.
Thron Apple (Solanaceae.)
Adapted to: ailments of young plethoric persons (Acon., Bell.); 
especially children in chorea; mania and fever delirium. Delirium: 
loquacious, talks all the time, sings, makes verses, raves; simulates 
Bell. and Hyos., yet differs in degree. The delirium is more furious, 
the mania more acute, while the congestion, though greater that 
Hyos., is much less that Bell., never approaching a true 
inflammation. Disposed to talk continually (Cic., Lach.); incessant 
and incohorent talking and laughing; praying, beseeching, 
entreating; with suppressed menses. Desires light and company; 
cannot bear to be alone (Bis.); worse in the dark and solitude; 
cannot walk in a dark room. Awakens with a shrinking look, as if 
afraid of the first object seen. Hallucinations which terrify the 
patient. Desire to escape, in delirium (Bell., Bry., Op., Rhus). 
Imagines all sorts of things; that she is double, lying crosswise, etc. 
(Petr.). Head feels as is scattered about (Bap.). Eyes wide open,  
prominent, brilliant; pupils widely dilated, insensible; contortion 
of eyes and eyelids. Pupils dilate when child is reprimanded. Face 
hot and red with cold hands and feet; circumscribed redness of 
cheeks, blood rushes to face; risus sardonicus. Stammering; has to 
exert himself a long time before he can utter a word; makes great 
effort to speak; distorts the face (Bov., Ign., Spig.). Vomiting: as 
soon as he raises head from pillow; from a bright light. 
Convulsions: from consciousness (Nux - without, Bell., Cic., 
Hyos., Op.); renewed by sight of bright light, of mirror or water 
(Bell., Lys.). Twitching of single muscle or groups of muscles, 
especially upper part of body; chorea. Hydrophobia: fear of water, 
with excessive aversion to liquids (Bell., Lys.); spasmodic 
constriction of throat. No pain with most complaints; painlessness 
is characteristic (Op.). Sleepy, but cannot sleep (Bell., Cham., 
Op.).
Relations. - Stramonium often follows: Bell., Cup., Hyos., Lys. In 
metrorrhagia from retained placenta with characteristic delirium, 
Sec. often acts promptly when Stram. has failed (with fever and 
septic tendency, Pyr.). After overaction, from repeated doses of 
Bell., in whooping cough.
Aggravation. - In the dark; when alone; looking at bright or 
shining objects; after sleep (Apis, Lach., Op., Spong.); when 
attempting to swallow.
Amelioration. - From bright light; from company; warmth.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sulphur.
Brimstone; Flowers of Sulphur. (The Element.)
Adapted to persons of a scrofulous diathesis, subject to venous 
congestion; especially of portal system. Persons of nervous 
temperament, quick motioned, quick tempered, plethoric, skin 
excessively sensitive to atmospheric changes (Hep., Kali c., Psor.). 
For lean, stoop-shouldered persons who walk and sit stooping; 
walk stooping like old men. Standing is the worst position for 
Sulphur patients; they cannot stand; every standing position is 
uncomfortable. Dirty, filthy people, prone to skin affections 
(Psor.). Aversion to being washed; always < after a bath. Too lazy 
to rouse himself; too unhappy to live. Children: cannot bear to be 
washed or bathed (in cold water, Ant. c.); emaciated, big-bellied; 
restless, hot, kick off the clothes at night (Hep., Sanic.); have 
worms, but the best selected remedy fails. When carefully selected  
remedies fail to produce a favorable effect, especially in acute 
diseases, it frequently serves to rouse the reactive powers of the 
system; clears up the case (in chronic diseases, Psor.). Scrofulous, 
psoric, chronic diseases that result from suppressed eruptions 
(Caust., Psor.). Complaints that are continually relapsing 
(menses, leucorrhoea, etc.); patient seems to get almost well when 
the disease returns again and again. Congestion to single parts; 
eyes, nose, chest, abdomen, ovaries, arms, legs, or any organ of the 
body marking the onset of tumors or malignant growths, especially 
at climacteric. Sensation of burning: on vertex; and smarting in 
eyes; in face, without redness; of vesicles in mouth; and dryness of 
throat, first right then left; in stomach; in rectum; in anus, and 
itching piles, and scalding urine; like fire in ripples (Ars.); in chest, 
rising to face; of skin of whole bloody, with hot flushes; in spots, 
between scapulae (Phos.). Sick headache every week or every two 
weeks; prostrating, weakening (Sang.); with hot vertex and cold 
feet. Constant heat on vertex; cold feet in daytime with burning 
soles at night, wants to find a cool place for them (Sang., Sanic.); 
puts them out of bed to cool off (Med.); cramps in calves and soles 
at night. Hot flushes during the day, with weak, faint spells passing 
off with a little moisture. Bright redness of lips as if the blood 
would burst through (Tub.). Weak, empty, gone or faint feeling in 
the stomach about 11 a. m. (10 or 11 a. m. > by eating, Nat. c.); 
cannot wait for lunch; frequent weak, faint spells during the day 
(compare, Zinc.). Diarrhoea: after midnight; painless; driving out 
of bed early in the morning (Aloe, Psor.); as if the bowels were 
too weak to retain their contents. Constipation: stools hard, knotty, 
dry as if burnt (Bry.); large, painful, child is afraid to have the 
stool on account of pain, or pain compels child to desist on first 
effort; alternating with diarrhoea. The discharge both of urine and 
faeces is painful to parts over which it passes; passes large 
quantities of colorless urine; parts round anus red, excoriated; 
all the orifices of the body are very red; all discharges acrid, 
excoriating whenever they touch. Menses: too early, profuse, 
protracted. Menorrhagia, has not been well since her last 
miscarriage. "A single dose at new moon." - Lippe. Boils: coming 
in crops in various parts of the body, or a single boil is succeeded 
by another as soon as first is healed (Tub.). Skin: itching, 
voluptuous; scratching >; "feels good to scratch;" scratching causes 
burning; < from heat of bed (Mer.); soreness in folds (Lyc.). Skin 
affections that have been treated by medicated soaps and washes; 
haemorrhoids, that have been treated with ointments. To facilitate 
absorption of serous or inflammatory exudates in brain, pleura, 
lungs, joints, when Bryonia, Kali mur. or the best selected remedy 
fails. Chronic alcoholism; dropsy and other ailments of drunkards; 
"they reform," but are continually relapsing (Psor., Tub.). Nightly 
suffocative attacks, wants the doors and windows open; becomes 
suddenly wide awake at night; drowsy in afternoon after sunset, 
wakefulness the whole night. Happy dreams, wakes up singing. 
Everything looks pretty which the patient takes a fancy to; even 
rags seem beautiful. Movement in abdomen as of a child (Croc., 
Thuja).
Relations. - Complemenatary: Aloe, Psor. Ailments from the 
abuse of metals generally. Compatible: Calc., Lyc., Puls., Sars., 
Sep. Sulph., Calc., Lyc.; or Sulph., Sars., Sep. frequently follow in 
given order. Calcarea must not be used before Sulphur. Sulphur is 
the chronic of Aconite and follows it well in pneumonia and other 
acute diseases.
Aggravation. - At rest; when standing; warmth in bed; washing, 
bathing, changeable weather (Rhus).
Amelioration. - Dry, warm weather; lying on the right side (rev. of 
Stan.).
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Sulphuric Acid.
Sulphuric Acid. (HNO4.)
Adapted to the light-haired; old people, especially women; flushes 
of heat in climacteric years. Unwilling to answer questions not 
from obstinacy, but inaptness. Feels in a great hurry; everything 
must be done quickly (Arg. n.). Pain of gradual and slowly-
increasing intensity which ceases suddenly when at its height, 
often repeated (Puls.). The pain is pressure as of a blunt 
instrument. Tendency to gangrene following mechanical injuries, 
especially of old people. Child has a sour odor despite careful 
washing (Hep., Mag. c., Rheum). Sensation as if the brain was 
loose in forehead and falling from side to side (Bell., Bry., Rhus, 
Spig.). Aphthae; of mouth, gums, or entire buccal cavity; gums 
bleed readily; ulcers painful; offensive breath (Bor.). Chronic 
heartburn, sour eructations, sets teeth on edge (Rob.). Water drunk 
causes coldness of the stomach unless mixed with alcoholic liquor. 
Sensation as if trembling all over, without real trembling; internal 
trembling of drunkards. Bad effects of mechanical injuries, with 
bruises, chafing and livid skin; prostration (Acet. ac.). Ecchymosis; 
cicatrices turn blood-red or blue, are painful (turn green, Led.). 
Petechia: purpura haemorrhagia; blue spots; livid, red itching 
blotches. Haemorrhage of black blood from all the outlets of the 
body (Crot., Mur. ac., Nit. ac., Ter.). Concussion of brain from fall 
or blow where skin is cold and body bathed in cold sweat. Weak 
and exhausted from deep-seated dyscrasia; no other symptoms 
(Psor., Sulph.).
Relations. - Complementary Puls. Compare: Ars., Bor., Calend., 
Led., Ruta, Rheum, Symp. In contusion and laceration of soft parts 
it vies with calendula. Follows well: after, Arn. with bruised pain, 
livid skin and profuse sweat; after, Led. in ecchymosis. Ailments 
from brandy-drinking. Sulphuric acid, one part, with three parts of 
alcohol, 10 to 15 drops, three times daily for three or four weeks, 
has been successfully used to subdue the craving for liquor - 
Hering.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Symphytum.
Comfrey (Borraginaceae)
Facilitates union of fractured bone (Cal. p.); lessens peculiar 
pricking pain; favors production of callous; when trouble is of 
nervous origin. Irritability at point of fracture; periosteal pain after 
wounds have healed. Mechanical injuries; blows, bruises, thrusts 
on the globe of the eye. Pain in eye after a blow of an obtuse body; 
snow ball strikes the eye; infant thrusts its fist into its mother's eye 
(to soft tissues around the eye, Arn.).
Relations. - Compare: Arn., Calend., Cal. p., Fluor. ac., Hep., Sil. 
Follows well: after Arnica for pricking pain, and soreness of 
periosteum remaining after an injury.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Syphillinum.
Syphilitic Virus. (A Nosode.)
Pains from darkness to daylight; begin with twilight and end 
with daylight (Merc., Phyt.). Pains increase and decrease gradually 
(Stan.); shifting and require frequent change of position. All 
symptoms are worse at night (Merc.); from sundown to sunrise. 
Eruptions: dull, red, copper-colored spots, becoming blue when 
getting cold. Extreme emaciation of entire body (Abrot., Iod.). 
Heart: lancinating pains from base to apex, at night (from apex to 
base, Med.; from base to clavicle or shoulder, Spig.). Loss of 
memory; cannot remember names of books, persons or places; 
arithmetical calculation difficult. Sensation: as if going insane, as 
if about to be paralyzed; of apathy and indifference. Terrible dread 
of night on account of mental and physical exhaustion on 
awakening; it is intolerable, death is preferable. Fears the terrific 
suffering from exhaustion on awakening (Lach.). Leucorrhoea; 
profuse; soaking through the napkins and running down the heels 
(Alum.). Headache, neuralgic in character, causing sleeplessness 
and delirium at night; commencing at 4 p. m.; worse from 10 to 11 
and ceasing at daylight (ceases at 11 or 12 p. m., Lyc.); falling of 
the hair. Acute ophthalmia neonatorum; lids swollen, adhere 
during sleep; pain intense at night < from 2 to 5 a. m., pus profuse; 
> by cold bathing. Ptosis: paralysis of superior oblique; sleepy look 
from drooping lids (Caust., Graph.). diplopia, one image seen 
below the other. Teeth: decay at edge of gum and break off; are 
cupped, edges serrated; dwarfed in size, converge at their tips 
(Staph.). Craving alcohol, in any form. Hereditary tendency to 
alcoholism (Asar., Psor., Tuber., Sulph., Sulph. ac.). Obstinate 
constipation for year; rectum seems tied up with strictures; when 
enema was used the agony of passage was like labor (Lac. c., 
Tub.). Fissures in anus and rectum (Thuja); prolapse of rectum; 
obstinate cases with a syphilitic history. Rheumatism of the 
shoulder joint, or at insertion of deltoid, < from raising arm 
laterally (Rhus - right shoulder, Sang.; left, Fer.). When the best 
selected remedy fails to relieve or permanently improve, in 
syphillitic affections. Syphilitics, or patients who have had chancre 
treated by local means, and as a result have suffered from throat 
and skin troubles for years, are nearly always benefited by this 
remedy at commencement of treatment unless some other remedy 
is clearly indicated.
Relations. - Compare: Aur., Asaf., Kali i., Merc., Phyt., in bone 
diseases and syphillitic affections.
Aggravation. - At night, from twilight to daylight.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen 
   
Tabacum.
Tobacco. (Solanaceae)
Diseases originating in cerebral irritation followed by marked 
irritation of functions of vagi. Emaciation of cheeks and back. 
Complete prostration of entire muscular system. Sensation of 
excessive wretchedness. Icy coldness of surface; covered with cold 
sweat. Symptoms occur in paroxysyms - asthma, sick headache, 
vertigo, sneezing. Great despondency with indigestion, palpitation, 
intermittent pulse. Vertigo: death-like pallor, increases to loss of 
consciousness; relieved in open air and by vomiting; on rising or 
looking upward; on opening the eyes. Sick headache coming on in 
early morning, intolerable by noon, deathly nausea, violent 
vomiting; < by noise and light; periodical, lasting one or two days. 
Sudden pain on right side, of head as if struck by a hammer or a 
club. Dim-sighted: see as though a veil; strabismus, depending 
upon brain troubles. Amaurosis, from atrophy of retina or optic 
nerve. Face pale, blue, pinched, sunken, collapsed, covered with 
cold sweat (cold sweat on forehad, Ver.). Nausea: incessant, as if 
seasick; vomiting, on least motion; with faintness; > in open air. 
Vomiting: violent, with cold sweat; soon as he begins to move; 
during pregnancy, when Lactic acid fails (Psor.). Seasickness; 
deathly nausea, pallor, coldness; < by least motion and > on deck 
in fresh, cold air. Terrible, faint, sinking feeling at pit of stomach. 
Sense of relaxation of stomach with nausea (Ipec., Staph.). Child 
wants abdomen uncovered; relieves nausea and vomiting; coldness 
in abdomen (Colch., Elaps, Lach.). Constipation: inactive bowel or 
paralysis of rectum; spasms of sphincter; prolapsus ani; of years' 
standing; herpes of anus. Diarrhoea: sudden, yellowish, greenish, 
slimy; urgent, watery; with nausea, vomiting, prostration and cold 
sweat (Ver.); with extreme faintness; from excessive smoking. enal 
colic: violent spasmodic pains along ureter left side (Berb.); 
deathly nausea and cold perspiration. Palpitation: violent when 
lying on left side; goes off when turning to the right. Pulse: quick, 
full, large; small intermittent, exceedingly slow; feeble, irregular, 
almost imperceptible. Hands icy cold, body warm. Legs icy cold, 
from knees down; trembling of limbs.
Relations. - Antidotes, for abuse of tobacco, are: Ipec., for 
excessive nausea and vomiting. Ars., for bad effects of tobacco 
chewing. Nux, for the gastric symptoms next morning after 
smoking. Phos., palpitation, tobacco heart, sexual weakness. Ign., 
for annoying hiccough from tobacco chewing. Clem., or Plant., for 
tobacco toothache. Sep., neuralgic affections of right side of face; 
dyspepsia; chronic nervousness, especially in sedentary 
occupations. Lyc., for impotence, spasms, cold sweat from 
excessive smoking. Gels., occipital headache and vertigo from 
excessive use, specially smoking. Tabaccum, potentized (200 or 
1000) to relieve terrible craving when discontinuing use.
Amelioration. - Open, fresh, cold air; uncovering.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Taraxacum.
Dandelion. (Compositae.)
For gastric and bilious attacks, especially gastric headaches. 
Mapped tongue (Lach., Mer., Nat. m.); covered with a white film 
with sensation of rawness. This film comes off in patches, leaving 
dark red, tender, very sensitive spots (Ran. s.). Jaundice with 
enlargment and induration of liver (mapped tongue). Debility, loss 
of appetite, profuse night sweats, especially when convalescing 
from bilious or typhoid fever. Restlessness of limbs in typhoid 
(Rhus, Zinc.).
Relations. - Compare: Bry., Hydr., Nux, in gastric and bilious 
affections.
Aggravation. - Almost all symptoms appear when sitting; lying 
down; resting.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Tarentula.
Tarantula; Cuban and Spanish. (Araneideae)
Adapted to highly nervous organisms, especially choleric 
affections where whole body, or right arm and left leg are affected 
(left arm and right leg, Agar.). Constant movement of the legs, 
arms, trunk, with inability to do anything; twitching and jerking of 
muscles. Restlessness, could not keep quiet in any position; must 
keep in motion, though walking < all symptoms (rev. of Rhus, 
Ruta). Hyperaesthesia: least excitement irritates, followed by 
languid sadness; extreme of tips of fingers. Slight touch along the 
spine provokes spasmodic pain in chest and cardiac region. 
Headache: intense, as if thousands of needles were pricking the 
brain. Absceses, boils, felons, affected parts of a bluish color 
(Lach.), and atrocious burning pain (Anth., Ars.); the agony of a 
felon, compelling patient to walk the floor for nights. Malignant 
ulcers; carbuncle, anthrax; gangrene. Symptoms appear 
periodically. Headache, neuralgic < by noise, touch, strong light, > 
by rubbing head against pillow. At every menstrual nisus, throat, 
mouth and tongue intolerably dry, specially when sleeping (Nux 
m.). Sexual excitement extreme even to mania; spasms of uterus 
pruritis vulva becomes intolerable.
Relations. - Similar: to, Apis, Crot., Lach., Plat., Mygale, Naja, 
Ther.
Aggravation. - Motion; contact; touch of affected parts; noise; 
change of weather.
Amelioration. - In open air; music; rubbing affected parts. 
Termini of nerves becomes so irritated and sensitive that some 
kind of friction was necessary to obtain refief.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Terebinth.
Oil of Turpentine (A Volatile Oil.)
The urine has the odor or violets. Tongue: smooth, glossy, red, as 
if deprived of papillae, or as if glazed (Pyr.); elevated papillae; 
coating peels off in patches leaving bright red spots, or entire 
coating cleans off suddenly (in exanthemata); dry and red; burning 
in tip (compare, Mur. ac.). Abdomen: extremely sensitive to touch; 
distention, flatulence, excessive tympanitis; meteorism (Colch.). 
Diarrhoea: stool, watery, greenish, mucous; frequent, profuse,  
fetid, bloody; burning in anus and rectum, fainting and exhaustion, 
after (Ars.). Worms: with foul breath, choking (Cina, Spig.); dry, 
hacking cough; tickling at anus; ascarides, lumbrici, tapeworm 
segments passed. Haematuria: blood thoroughly mixed with the 
urine; sediment, like coffee-grounds; cloudy, smoky, albuminous;  
profuse, dark or black, painless. Congestion and inflammation of 
viscera; kidneys, bladder, lungs, intestines, uterus; with 
haemorrhage, and malignant tendency. Purpurea haemorrhagica; 
fresh ecchymosis in great numbers from day to day (Sulph. ac.). 
Ascites with anasarca, in organic lesions of kidneys; dropsy after 
scarlatina (Apis, Hell., Lach.). Haemorrhages; from bowels, with 
ulceration; passive, dark, with ulceration or epithelial degeneration. 
Violent burning and drawing pains in kidney, bladder and urethra 
(Berb., Can., Canth.). Violent burning and cutting in bladder; 
tenesmus; sensitive hypogastrium; cystitis and retention from 
atony of fundus. Albuminuria; acute, in early stages, when blood 
and albumin abound more than casts and epithelium; after 
diphtheria, scarlatina, typhoid. Urine rich in albumin and blood, 
but few if any casts; < from living in damp dwellings. Strangury; 
spasmodic retention of urine.
Relations. - Compare: Alumen, Arn., Ars., Canth., Lach., Nit. ac. 
Is recommended as a prophylactic in malarial and African fevers.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Theridion Curassavicum.
Orange Spider (Araneideae)
Time passes too quickly (too slowly, Arg. n., Can. I., Nux m.). 
Vertigo: on closing the eyes (Lach., Thuja - on opening them, 
Tab.; on looking upward, Puls, Sil.); from any, even the least 
noise; aural or labyrinthine (Meniere's disease). Nausea: from least 
motion, and especially on closing the eyes; from fast riding in a 
carriage. Headache: when beginning to move, as of a dull heavy 
pressure begin the eyes; violent, deep, in the brain; < lying down 
(Lach.); very much < from others walking on the floor, or from 
least motion of head. Every sound seems to penetrate through 
the whole body, causing nausea and vertigo. Chronic nasal 
catarrh; discharge thick, yellow, greenish, offensive (Puls., Thuja). 
Toothache: every shrill sound penetrates the teeth. Seasickness of 
nervous women; they close their eyes to get rid of the motion of 
the vessel and grown deathly sick. Violent stitches in upper left 
chest, below the scapula, extending to neck (Anis., Myr., Pix, 
Sulph.). Pains in the bones all over, as if broken. Great 
sensitiveness between vertebrae, sits sideways in the chair to avoid 
pressure against spine (Chin. s.); < by least nose and jar of foot on 
floor. For extreme nervous sensitiveness; of puberty, during 
pregnancy and climacteric years. "In rachitis, caries, necrosis, it 
apparently goes to the root of the evil and destroys the cause." - Dr. 
Baruch. Phthisis florida, often affects a cure if given in the early 
stages of disease. In scrofulosis where the best chosen remedies 
fail to relieve.
Relations. - Follows well after, Cal. and Lyc.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Thlaspi Bursa Pastoris.
Shepherds Purse. (Cruciferae)
Profuse passive haemorrhage from every outlet of the body; blood 
dark and clotted. Metrorrhagia: with violent cramps and uterine 
colic; in chlorosis; after abortion, labor, miscarriage; at climacteric; 
with cancer uteri (Phos., Ust.). Menses: too early; too profuse; 
protracted (eight, ten, even fifteen days); tardy in starting, first day 
merely a show; second day colic, vomiting, a haemorrhage with 
large clots; each alternate period more profuse. Haemorrhage or 
delaying menses from uterine inertia; exhausting, scarcely recovers 
from one period before another begins. Leucorrhoea: bloody, dark, 
offensive; some days before and after menses.
Relations. - Comare: Sinapsis, Tillium, Viburnum, Ustilago.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Thuja Occidentalis.
Tree of Life; White Cedar. (Coniferae)
Adapted to hydrogenoid constitution of Granvogl, which is related 
to sycosis as effect is to cause. Thuja bears the same relation to the 
sycosis of Hahnemann - fig warts, condylomata and wart-like 
excrescences upon mucous and cutaneous surfaces - that Sulphur 
does to psora or Mercury to syphilis. Acts well in lymphatic 
temperament, in very fleshy persons, dark complexion, black hair, 
unhealthy skin. Ailments from bad effects of vaccination (Ant. t., 
Sil.); from suppressed or maltreated gonorrhoea (Med.). Fixed 
ideas: as if a strange person were at his side; as if soul and body 
were separated; as if a living animal were in abdomen; of being 
under the influence of a superior power. Insane women will not be 
touched or approached. Vertigo, when closing the eyes (Lach., 
Ther.). Headache: as if a nail had been driven into parietal bone 
(Coff., Ign.); or as if a convex button were pressed on the part; < 
from sexual excesses; overheating from tea (Sel.); chronic, or 
sycotic or syphilitic origin. White scaly dandruff; hair dry and 
falling out. Eyes: ophthalmia neonatorum, sycotic or syphilitic; 
large granulations, like warts or blisters; > by warmth and 
covering; in uncovered, feels as if a cold stream of air were 
blowing out through them. Eyelids: agglutinated at night; dry, 
scaly on edges; styes and tarsal tumors; chalazae, thick, hard knots, 
like small condylomata; after Stapisagria partially > but does not 
cure. Ears: chronic otitis; discharge purulent, like putrid meat; 
granulations, condylomata; polypi, pale red, cellular, bleeding 
easily. Chronic catarrh: after exanthemata; thick, green mucus, 
blood and pus (Puls.). Teeth decay at the roots, crowns remain 
sound (Mez. - on edges, Staph.); crumble, turn yellow (Syph.). 
Ranula: bluish, or varicose veins on tongue or in mouth (Amb.). 
Toothache from tea drinking. "On blowing the nose a pressing pain 
in the hollow tooth or at the side of it (Culex)." - Boenninghausen. 
Abdomen: as if an animal were crying; motion as if something 
alive; protrudes here and there like the arm of a foetus (Croc., Nux 
m., Sulph.). Distressing, burning pain in left ovarian region when 
walking or riding, must sit or lie down (Croc., Ust.); worse at each 
menstrual nisus. Constipation: violent pains in rectum compel 
cessation of effort; stool recedes, after being partly expelled 
(Sanic., Sil.). Piles swollen, pain most severe when sitting. 
Diarrhoea: early morning; expelled forcibly with much flatus 
(Aloe); gurgling, as water from a bunghole; < after breakfast, 
coffee, fat food, vaccinations. Anus fissured, painful to touch 
surrounded with flat warts, or moist mucous condylomata. Coition 
prevented by extreme sensitiveness of the vagina (Plat. - by 
dryness, Lyc., Lys., Natr.). Skin: looks dirty; brown or brownish-
white spots here and there; warts, large, seedy, pedunculated 
(Staph.); eruptions only on covered parts, burn after scratching. 
Flesh feels as if beaten, from the bones (Phyt. - as if scraped, 
Rhus). Sensation after urinating, as of urine trickling in urethra; 
severe cutting at close of urination (Sars.). Chill, beginning in the 
thighs. Sweat: only on uncovered parts; or all over except the head 
(rev. of Sil.); when he sleeps, stops when he wakes (rev. of Samb.); 
profuse, sour smelling, fetid at night. Persipration, smelling like 
honey, on the genitals. When walking the limbs feel as if made of 
wood. Sensation as if body, especially the limbs, were made of 
glass and would break easily. Suppressed gonorrhoea: causing 
articular rheumatism; prostatitis; sycosis; impotence; condylomata 
and many constitutional troubles. Nails: deformed, brittle (Ant. c.).
Relations. - Complementary: Med., Sab., Sil. Compare: Cann. s., 
Canth., Cop., Staph. Cinnab. is preferable for warts on the prepuce. 
Follows well: after, Med., Mer., Nit. ac.
Aggravation. - At night; from heat of bed; at 3 a. m. and 3 p. m.; 
from cold damp air; narcotics.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Trillium Pendulum.
Wake Robin (Smilaceae)
Haemorrhage: copious, both active and passive, usually bright red; 
from nose, lungs, kidneys and uterus (Ipec., Mill.). Tendency to 
puterescence of fluids. Epistaxis; profuse, passive, bright red. 
Bleeding from cavity after extraction of a tooth (Ham., Kreos.). 
Menses: profuse, every two weeks, lasting a week or longer 
(Calc. p.); after over-exertion or too long a ride. Flooding, with 
fainting. Menorrhagia: flow, profuse, gushing, bright red; at least  
movement (Sab.); from displaced uterus; at the climacteric; every 
two weeks, dark, clotted (Thlas., Ust.). Haemoptysis: incipient 
phthisis, with bloody sputa; in advanced stages with copious, 
purulent expectoration and troublesome cough. Sensation as if hips 
and small of back were falling to pieces; as if sacro-iliac 
synhrondroses were falling apart, wants to be bound tightly; as if 
bones of pelvis were broken (Aesc.); with haemorrhage. Profuse 
uterine haemorrhage t climacteric; flow every two weeks; pale, 
faint, dim sight, palpitation, obstruction and noises in ears (Fer.); 
painful sinking at pit of stomach.
Relations. - Complementary: to Cal. p., in menstrual and 
haemorrhagic affections. Compare: Cinch., Bell., Kali c., Mill., 
Lach., Sep., Sulph., Thlas., Ust.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Tuberculinum-Bacillinum.
Pus (with bacilli) from tubercular abscess (A Nosode.)
Note: *The potencies of Fincke and Swan were prepared from a 
drop of pus obtained from a pulmonary tubercular abscess or sputa. 
Those of Heath from a tuberculous lung in which the bacillus 
tuberculosis had been found microscopically; hence the former was 
called Tuberculinum and the latter Bacillinum. Both preparations 
are reliable and effective.
Adapted to persons of light complexion; blue eyes, blonde in 
preference to brunette; tall slim, flat, narrow chest; active and 
precocious mentally, weak physically; the tubercular diathesis. 
When the family history of tubercular affections the best selected  
remedy fails to relieve or permanently improve, without reference 
to name of disease. Symptoms ever changing; ailments affecting 
one organ, then another - the lungs, brain, kidneys, liver, stomach, 
nervous system - beginning suddenly, ceasing suddenly. Takes 
cold easily without knowing how or where; seems to take cold 
"every time he takes a breath of fresh air" (Hep.). Emaciation 
rapid and pronounced; losing flesh while eating well (Abrot., 
Calc., Con., Iod., Nat.). Melancholy, despondent; morose, irritable, 
fretful, peevish; taciturn, sulky; naturally of a sweet disposition, 
now on the borderland of insanity. Everything in the room seemed 
strange, as though in a strange place. Headache: chronic, 
tubercular; pain intense, sharp, cutting, from above right eye to 
occiput; as of an iron hoop round the head (Anac., Sulph.); when 
the best selected remedy only palliates. School-girl's headache: < 
by study or even slight mental exertion; when using eyes in close 
work and glasses fail to >; with a tubercular history. Acute cerebral 
or basilar meningitis, with threatened effusion; nocturnal 
hallucinations; wakes from sleep frightened, screaming; when 
Apis, Hell., or Sulph., though well selected, fail to improve. Crops 
of small boils, intensely painful, successively appear in the nose; 
green, fetid pus (Sec.). Plica polonica; several bad cases 
permanently cured after Bor. and Psor. failed. Diarrhoea: early 
morning, sudden, imperative (Sulph.); emaciating though eating 
well (Iod., Nat.); stool dark, brown, watery, offensive; discharged 
with great force; great weakness and profuse night sweats. Menses: 
too early; too profuse; too long-lasting; tardy in starting; with 
frightful dysmenorrhoea; in patients with a tubercular history. 
Tubercular deposit begins in apex of lungs, usually the left (Phos., 
Sulph., Ther.). Eczema: tubercular over entire body; itching 
intense, < at night when undressing, from bathing; immense 
quantities of white bran-like scales; oozing behind the ears, in the 
hair, in folds of skin with rawness and soreness; fiery red skin. 
Ringworm.
Relations. - Complementary: Psor., Sulph. When Psor., Sulph., or 
the best selected remedy fails to relieve or permanently improve; 
follows Psor. as a constitutional remedy in hay fever, asthma. 
Belladonna, for acute attacks, congestive or inflammatory, 
occurring in tubercular diseases. Hydrastis to fatten patients cured 
with Tuber.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Valeriana.
Valerian. (Valerianaceae.)
Excessive nervous excitability; hysterical nervous temperament 
(Ign., Puls.); persons in whom the intellectual faculties 
predominate; changeable disposition. Red parts become white 
(Fer.). Feels light as if floating in the air (Asar., Lac c., - as if legs 
were floating Sticta). Oversensitiveness of all the senses (Cham., 
Nux). Sensation of great coldness in head (on vertex, Sep., Ver.). 
Sensation as if a thread were hanging down throat (on tongue, Nat. 
Sil.). Child vomits: curdled milk, in large lumps; same in stools 
(Aeth.); as soon as it has nursed, after mother has been angry. 
Sciatica: pain < when standing and letting foot rest on floor 
(Bell.); when straightening out limb, during rest from previous 
exertion; > when walking.
Relations. - Compare: Asaf., Asar., Croc., Ign., Lac c., Spig., 
Sulph. For the abuse of Chamomile tea. For pains in heels: Agar., 
Caust., Cyc., Led., Mang., Phyt.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Variolinum.
Pus from smallpox pustule. (A Nosode.)
Only fragmentary provings. Bears the same relation to smallpox 
that Antitoxin does to diphtheria. An extended clinical record by 
competent and reliable observers attest its curative value in variola 
- simple, confluent and malignant - as well as in varioloid and 
varicella. It has done splendid work in all potencies, from the 6th 
cent. to the c. m. As a preventive of, or protection against, 
smallpox, it is far superior to crude vaccination and absolutely safe 
from the sequenae, especially septic and tubercular infection. The 
efficacy of the potency is the stumbling block to the materialist. 
But is it more difficult to comprehend than the infectious nature of 
variola, measles or pertusis? Those who have not used, like those 
who have not experimentally tested the law of similars, are not 
competent witnesses. Put it to the test and publish the failures to 
the world.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Veratrum Album.
While Hellebore. (Melanthaceae.)
For children and old people; the extremes of life; persons who are 
habitually cold and deficient in vital reaction; young people of a 
nervous sanguine temperament. Adapted to diseases with rapid 
sinking of the vital forces; complete prostration; collapse. Cold 
perspiration on the forehead (over entire body, Tab.); with 
nearly all complaints. Cannot bear to be left alone; yet persistently 
refuses to talk. Thinks she is pregnant or will soon be delivered. 
Mania with desire to cut and tear everything, especially clother 
(Taran.); with lewd, lascivious talk, amorous or religious (Hyos., 
Stram.). Attacks of fainting from least exertion (Carbo v., Sulph.); 
excessive weakness. Sinking feeling during haemorrhage (fainting, 
Trill.). Sensation of a lump of ice on vertex, with chilliness (Sep.); 
as of heat and cold at same time on scalp; as if brain were torn to 
pieces. Face: pale, blue, collapsed; features sunkden, 
hippocratic; red while lying, becomes pale on rising up (Acon.). 
Thirst: intense, unquenchable, for large quantities of very cold 
water and acid drinks; wants everything cold. Craving for acids or  
refreshing things (Phos. ac.). Ice coldness: of face, tip of nose, feet, 
legs, hands, arms, and many other parts. Cold feeling in abdomen 
(Colch., Tab.). Violent vomiting with profuse diarrhoea. 
Vomiting: excessive with nausea and great prostration: < by 
drinking (Ars.); by least motion (Tab.); great weakness after. 
Cutting pain in abdomen as from knives. Cholera: vomiting and 
purging; stool, profuse, watery, gushing, prostrating; after fright 
(Acon.). Diarrhoea: frequent, greenish, watery, gushing: mixed 
with flakes: cutting colic, with cramps commencing in hands and 
feet and spreading all over; prostrating, after fright; < least 
movement; with vomiting, cold sweat on forehead during and 
prostration after (Ars., Tab.). Constipation: no desire; stool large, 
hard (Bry., Sulph.); in round, black balls (Chel., Op., Plb.); from 
inactive rectum; frequent desire felt in epigastrium (Ign. - in 
rectum, Nux); painful, of infants and children, after Lyc., and Nux. 
Dysmenorrhoea: with vomiting and purging, or exhausting 
diarrhoea with cold sweat (Amm. c., Bov.); is so weak can scarcely 
stand for two days at each menstrual nisus (Alum., Carbo an., 
Coc.). Bad effects of opium eating, tabacco chewing. Pains in the 
limbs during wet weather, getting worse from warmth of bed, 
better by continued walking. In congestive or pernicious 
intermittent fever, with extreme coldness, thirst, face cold and 
collapsed; skin cold and clammy, great prostration; cold sweat on 
forehead and deathly pallor on face.
Relations. - After: Ars., Arn., Cinch., Cup., Ipec. After Camph. in 
cholera and cholera morbus. After Amm. c., Carbo v. and Bov., in 
dysmenorrhoea with vomiting and purging.
Aggravation. - From least motion; after drinking; before and 
during menses; during stool; when perspiring; after fright. Often 
removes bad effects of excessive use of alcohol and tabacco.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Veratrum Viride.
Green Hellebore. (Melanthaceae.)
For full-blooded, plethoric persons. Congestion, especially to base 
of brain, chest, spine and stomach. Violent pains attending 
inflammation. Acute rheumatism, high fever, full, hard rapid pulse, 
sever pains in joints and muscles (Bry., Salic. ac.); scanty, red 
urine. Child trembles, jerks, threatened with convulsions; continual 
jerking or nodding of the head. Nervous or sick headache; 
congestion from suppressed menses; intense, almost apoplectic, 
with violent nausea and vomiting. Congestive apoplexy, hot head, 
bloodshot eyes, thick speech, slow full pulse, hard as iron. 
Convulsions: dim vision; basilar meningitis; head retracted; child 
on verge of spasms. Cerebro-spinal diseases; with spasms, dilated 
pupils, tetanic convulsions, opisthotonos; cold clammy 
perspiration. Sunstroke, head full, throbbing of arteries, sensitive 
to sound, double or partial vision (Gels., Glon.). Tongue: white or 
yellow with red streak down the middle; dry, moist, white or 
yellow coating, or no coating on either side; feels scalded (Sang.). 
Pulse: suddenly increases and gradually deceases below normal; 
slow, soft, weak; irregular, intermittent (Dig., Tab.). Veratrum 
viride should not be given simply to "bring down the pulse," 
or"control the heart's action," but like any other remedy for the 
totalityof the symptoms.
 
Keynotes by H.C. Allen   
Zincum Metallicum.
Zinc. (The Element.)
Persons suffering from cerebral and nervous exhaustion; defective 
vitality; brain or nerve power wanting; too weak to develop 
exanthemata or menstrual function, to expectorate, to urinate; to 
comprehend, to memorize. Incessant and violent fidgety feeling 
in feet or lower extremeties; must move them constantly. 
Always feels better every way as soon as the menses begin to 
flow; it relieves all her sufferings; but they return again soon after 
the flow ceases. In the cerebral affections: in impending paralysis 
of brain; where the vis medicatrix naturae is too weak to develop 
exanthemata (Cup., Sulph., Tub.); symptoms of effusion into 
ventricles. Child repeats everything said to it. Child cries out 
during sleep; whole body jerks during sleep; wakes frightened, 
starts, rolls the head from side to side; face alternately pale and 
red. Convulsions: during dentition, with pale face, no heat, except 
perhaps in occiput, no increase in temperature (rev. of Bell.); 
rolling the eyes; gnashing the teeth. Automatic motion of hands 
and head, or one hand and head (Apoc., Bry., Hell.). Chorea: from 
suppresse eruption; from fright. Hunger: ravenous, about 11 or 12 
a. m. (Sulph.); great greediness when eating; cannot eat fast 
enough (incipient brain disease in children). Excessive nervous 
moving of feet, in bed for hours after retiring, even when asleep. 
Feet sweaty and more about toes; fetid, suppressed foot-sweat; 
very nervous. Chillblains, painful, < from rubbing. Spinal 
affections; burning whole length of spine; backache much < from 
sitting > by walking about (Cobalt., Puls., Rhus). Spinal irritation; 
great prostration of strength. Cannot bear back touched (Chin. s., 
Taren., Ther.). Can only void urine while sitting bent backwards. 
Twitching and jerking of single muscles (Agar., Ign.). Weakness 
and trembling of extremities; of hands while writing; during 
menses. During sweat, cannot tolerate any covering.
Relations. - Compare: Hell., Tuber., in incipient brain diseases 
from suppressed eruptions.
Aggravation. - Of many symptoms from drinking wine, even a 
small quantity (Alum., Con.).
Amelioration. - Symptoms: of chest, by expectoration; of bladder, 
by urinating; of back, by emissions (< by Cobalt.); general, by 
menstrual flow. Is followed well by, Ign., but not by Nux, which 
disagrees.
Inimical - Cham., and Nux; should not be used before or after.
 

